The Project Gutenberg eBook of All quiet on the W
estern Front This ebook is for the use of anyone a
nywhere in the United States and most other parts 
of the world at no cost and with almost no restric
tions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
 re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenber
g License included with this ebook or online at ww
w.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the Uni
ted States, you will have to check the laws of the
 country where you are located before using this e
Book. Title: All quiet on the Western Front Author
: Erich Maria Remarque Translator: A. W. Wheen Rel
ease date: January 1, 2025 [eBook #75011] Language
: English Original publication: London: G. P. Putn
am's Sons, 1929 Credits: Al Haines *** START OF TH
E PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN
 FRONT *** ERICH MARIA REMARQUE ALL QUIET ON THE W
ESTERN FRONT _Translated from the German by A. W. 
WHEEN_ LONDON G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS IM WESTEN NICHTS
 NEUES _first published_ _in Germany January_ 1929
 _First published in England March_ 1929 _Reprinte
d April_ 1929 _Reprinted April_ 1929 _Reprinted Ap
ril_ 1929 _Reprinted April_ 1929 _Reprinted April_
 1929 _Reprinted April_ 1929 _Reprinted April_ 192
9 _Reprinted April_ 1929 _Reprinted May_ 1929 _Rep
rinted May_ 1929 _Reprinted May_ 1929 _Reprinted J
une_ 1929 _Reprinted June_ 1929 _Completing_ 90,00
0 PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN. CHISWICK PRESS; CHARLE
S WHITTINGHAM AND GRIGGS (PRINTERS), LTD. TOOKS CO
URT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON. This book is to be nei
ther an accusation nor a confession, and least of 
all an adventure, for death is not an adventure to
 those who stand face to face with it. It will try
 simply to tell of a generation of men who, even t
hough they may have escaped its shells, were destr
oyed by the war. ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT CH
APTER I We are at rest five miles behind the front
. Yesterday we were relieved, and now our bellies 
are full of beef and haricot beans. We are satisfi
ed and at peace. Each man has another mess-tin ful
l for the evening; and, what is more, there is a d
ouble ration of sausage and bread. That puts a man
 in fine trim. We have not had such luck as this f
or a long time. The cook with his carroty head is 
begging us to eat; he beckons with his ladle to ev
ery one that passes, and spoons him out a great do
llop. He does not see how he can empty his stew-po
t in time for coffee. Tjaden and Müller have produ
ced two wash-basins and had them filled up to the 
brim as a reserve. In Tjaden this is voracity, in 
Müller it is foresight. Where Tjaden puts it all i
s a mystery, for he is and always will be as thin 
as a rake. What's more important still is the issu
e of a double ration of smokes. Ten cigars, twenty
 cigarettes, and two quids of chew per man; now th
at is decent. I have exchanged my chewing tobacco 
with Katczinsky for his cigarettes, which means I 
have forty altogether. That's enough for a day. It
 is true we have no right to this windfall. The Pr
ussian is not so generous. We have only a miscalcu
lation to thank for it. Fourteen days ago we had t
o go up and relieve the front line. It was fairly 
quiet on our sector, so the quartermaster who rema
ined in the rear had requisitioned the usual quant
ity of rations and provided for the full company o
f one hundred and fifty men. But on the last day a
n astonishing number of English field-guns opened 
up on us with high-explosive, drumming ceaselessly
 on our position, so that we suffered heavily and 
came back only eighty strong. Last night we moved 
back and settled down to get a good sleep for once
: Katczinsky is right when he says it would not be
 such a bad war if only one could get a little mor
e sleep. In the line we have had next to none, and
 fourteen days is a long time at one stretch. It w
as noon before the first of us crawled out of our 
quarters. Half an hour later every man had his mes
s-tin and we gathered at the cook-house, which sme
lt greasy and nourishing. At the head of the queue
 of course were the hungriest--little Albert Kropp
, the clearest thinker among us and therefore the 
first to be lance-corporal; Müller, who still carr
ies his school textbooks with him, dreams of exami
nations, and during a bombardment mutters proposit
ions in physics; Leer, who wears a full beard and 
has a preference for the girls from officers' brot
hels. He swears that they are obliged by an army o
rder to wear silk chemises and to bathe before ent
ertaining guests of the rank of major and upwards.
 And as the fourth, myself, Paul Bäumer. All four 
are nineteen years of age, and all four joined up 
from the same class as volunteers for the war. Clo
se behind us were our friends: Tjaden, a skinny lo
ck-smith of our own age, the biggest eater of the 
company. He sits down to eat as thin as a grasshop
per and gets up as big as a bug in the family way;
 Haie Westhus, of the same age, a peat-digger, who
 can easily hold a ration-loaf in his hand and say
: Guess what I've got in my fist; then Detering, a
 peasant, who thinks of nothing but his farm-yard 
and his wife; and finally Stanislaus Katczinsky, t
he leader of our group, shrewd, cunning, and hard-
bitten, forty years of age, with a face of the soi
l, blue eyes, bent shoulders, and a remarkable nos
e for dirty weather, good food, and soft jobs. Our
 gang formed the head of the queue before the cook
-house. We were growing impatient, for the cook pa
id no attention to us. Finally Katczinsky called o
ut to him: "Say, Heinrich, open up the soup-kitche
n. Anyone can see the beans are done." He shook hi
s head sleepily: "You must all be there first." Tj
aden grinned: "We are all here." The sergeant-cook
 still took no notice. "That may do for you," he s
aid. "But where are the others?" "They won't be fe
d by you to-day. They're either in the dressing-st
ation or pushing up daisies." The cook was quite d
isconcerted as the facts dawned on him. He was sta
ggered. "And I have cooked for one hundred and fif
ty men----" Kropp poked him in the ribs. "Then for
 once we'll have enough. Come on, begin!" Suddenly
 a vision came over Tjaden. His sharp, mousey feat
ures began to shine, his eyes grew small with cunn
ing, his jaws twitched, and he whispered hoarsely:
 "Man! then you've got bread for one hundred and f
ifty men too, eh?" The sergeant-cook nodded absent
-minded, and bewildered. Tjaden seized him by the 
tunic. "And sausage?" Ginger nodded again. Tjaden'
s chaps quivered. "Tobacco too?" "Yes, everything.
" Tjaden beamed: "What a bean-feast! That's all fo
r us! Each man gets--wait a bit--yes, practically 
two issues." Then Ginger stirred himself and said:
 "That won't do." Then we got excited and began to
 crowd around. "Why won't that do, you old carrot?
" demanded Katczinsky. "Eighty men can't have what
 is meant for a hundred and fifty." "We'll soon sh
ow you," growled Müller. "I don't care about the s
tew, but I can only issue rations for eighty men,"
 persisted Ginger. Katczinsky got angry. "You migh
t be generous for once. You haven't drawn food for
 eighty men. You've drawn it for the Second Compan
y. Good. Let's have it then. We are the Second Com
pany." We began to jostle the fellow. No one felt 
kindly toward him, for it was his fault that the f
ood twice came up to us in the line too late and c
old. Under shell-fire he wouldn't bring his kitche
n up near enough, so that our soup-carriers had to
 go much farther than those of the other companies
. Now Bulcke of the First Company is a much better
 fellow. He is as fat as a hamster in winter, but 
he trundles his pots when it comes to that right u
p to the very front line. We were in just the righ
t mood, and there would certainly have been a dust
-up if our company commander had not appeared. He 
informed himself of the dispute, and only remarked
: "Yes, we did have heavy losses yesterday." He lo
oked in the dixie. "The beans look good." Ginger n
odded. "Cooked with meat and fat." The lieutenant 
looked at us. He knew what we were thinking. And h
e knew many other things too, because he came to t
he company as a non-com. and was promoted from the
 ranks. He lifted the lid from the dixie again and
 sniffed. Then passing on he said: "Serve out the 
whole issue. We can do with it. And bring me a pla
te full too." Ginger looked sheepish as Tjaden dan
ced round him. "It doesn't cost you anything! One 
would think the quartermaster's store belonged to 
him! And now get on with it, you old blubber-stick
er, and don't you miscount either." "You be hanged
!" spat out Ginger. When things get beyond him he 
throws up the sponge altogether; he just goes to p
ieces. And as if to show that all things were now 
the same to him, of his own free will he shared ou
t half a pound of synthetic honey equally among us
. To-day is wonderfully good. The mail has come, a
nd almost every man has a couple of letters and pa
pers. We stroll over to the meadow behind the bill
ets. Kropp has the round lid of a margarine tub un
der his arm. On the right side of the meadow a lar
ge common latrine has been built, a well-planned a
nd durable construction. But that is for recruits 
who as yet have not learned how to make the most o
f whatever comes their way. We look for something 
better. Scattered about everywhere there are separ
ate, individual boxes for the same purpose. They a
re square, neat boxes with wooden sides all round,
 and have unimpeachably satisfactory seats. On the
 sides are hand-grips enabling one to shift them a
bout. We move three together in a ring and sit dow
n comfortably. For two hours we have been here wit
hout getting up. I well remember how embarrassed w
e were as recruits in barracks when we had to use 
the general latrine. There were no doors and twent
y men sat side by side as in a railway carriage, s
o that they could be reviewed all at one glance, f
or soldiers must always be under supervision. Sinc
e then we have learned better than to be shy about
 such trifling immodesties. In time things far wor
se than that came easy to us. Here in the open air
 though, the business is entirely a pleasure. I no
 longer understand why we should always have shied
 at it before. It is, in fact, just as natural as 
eating and drinking. We did not properly appreciat
e these boxes when we first enlisted; they were ne
w to us and did not fill such an important rôle--b
ut now they have long been a matter of course. The
 soldier is on friendlier terms than other men wit
h his stomach and intestines. Three-quarters of hi
s vocabulary is derived from these regions, and th
ey give an intimate flavour to expressions of his 
greatest joy as well as of his deepest indignation
. It is impossible to express oneself in any other
 way so clearly and pithily. Our families and our 
teachers will be shocked when we go home, but here
 it is the universal language. Enforced publicity 
has in our eyes restored the character of complete
 innocence to all these things. More than that, th
ey are so much a matter of course that their comfo
rtable performance is fully as much enjoyed as the
 playing of a safe top running flush. Not for noth
ing was the word "latrine-rumour" invented; these 
places are the regimental gossip-shops and common-
rooms. We feel ourselves for the time being better
 off than in any palatial white-tiled "convenience
." _There_ it can only be hygienic; _here_ it is b
eautiful. These are wonderfully care-free hours. O
ver us is the blue sky. On the horizon float the b
right yellow, sunlit observation-balloons, and the
 many little white clouds of the anti-aircraft she
lls. Often they rise in a sheaf as they follow aft
er an airman. We hear the muffled rumble of the fr
ont only as very distant thunder, bumble-bees dron
ing by quite drown it. Around us stretches the flo
wery meadow. The grasses sway their tall spears; t
he white butterflies flutter around and float on t
he soft warm wind of the late summer. We read lett
ers and newspapers and smoke. We take off our caps
 and lay them down beside us. The wind plays with 
our hair; it plays with our words and thoughts. Th
e three boxes stand in the midst of the glowing, r
ed field-poppies. We set the lid of the margarine 
tub on our knees and so have a good table for a ga
me of skat. Kropp has the cards with him. After ev
ery throw-in the loser pays into the pool. One cou
ld sit like this for ever. The notes of an accordi
on float across from the billets. Often we lay asi
de the cards and look about us. One of us will say
: "Well, boys...." Or "It was a near thing that ti
me...." And for a moment we fall silent. There is 
in each of us a feeling of constraint. We are all 
sensible of it; it needs no words to communicate i
t. It might easily have happened that we should no
t be sitting here on our boxes to-day; it came dam
n near to that. And so everything is new and brave
, red poppies and good food, cigarettes and summer
 breeze. Kropp asks: "Anyone seen Kemmerich lately
?" "He's up at St. Joseph's," I tell him. Müller e
xplains that he has a flesh wound in his thigh; a 
good blighty. We decide to go and see him this aft
ernoon. Kropp pulls out a letter. "Kantorek sends 
you all his best wishes." We laugh. Müller throws 
his cigarette away and says: "I wish he was here."
 * * Kantorek had been our schoolmaster, an active
 little man in a grey tail-coat, with a face like 
a shrew-mouse. He was about the same size as Corpo
ral Himmelstoss, the "Terror of Klosterberg." It i
s very queer that the unhappiness of the world is 
so often brought on by small men. They are so much
 more energetic and uncompromising than the big fe
llows. I have always taken good care to keep out o
f sections with small company commanders. They are
 mostly confounded little martinets. During drill-
time Kantorek gave us long lectures until the whol
e of our class went under his shepherding to the D
istrict Commandant and volunteered. I can see him 
now, as he used to glare at us through his spectac
les and say in a moving voice: "Won't you join up,
 Comrades." These teachers always carry their feel
ings ready in their waistcoat pockets, and fetch t
hem out at any hour of the day. But we didn't thin
k of that then. There was, indeed, one of us who h
esitated and did not want to fall into line. That 
was Josef Behm, a plump, homely fellow. But he did
 allow himself to be persuaded, otherwise he would
 have been ostracized. And perhaps more of us thou
ght as he did, but no one could very well stand ou
t, because at that time even one's parents were re
ady with the word "coward"; no one had the vaguest
 idea what we were in for. The wisest were just th
e poor and simple people. They knew the war to be 
a misfortune, whereas people who were better off w
ere beside themselves with joy, though they should
 have been much better able to judge what the cons
equences would be. Katczinsky said that was a resu
lt of their upbringing. It made them stupid. And w
hat Kat said, he had thought about. Strange to say
, Behm was one of the first to fall. He got hit in
 the eye during an attack, and we left him lying f
or dead. We couldn't bring him with us, because we
 had to come back helter-skelter. In the afternoon
 suddenly we heard him call, and saw him outside c
reeping towards us. He had only been knocked uncon
scious. Because he could not see, and was mad with
 pain, he failed to keep under cover, and so was s
hot down before anyone could go and fetch him in. 
Naturally we couldn't blame Kantorek for this. Whe
re would the world be if one brought every man to 
book? There were thousands of Kantoreks, all of wh
om were convinced that there was only one way of d
oing well, and that way theirs. And that is just w
hy they let us down so badly. For us lads of eight
een they ought to have been mediators and guides t
o the world of maturity, the world of work, of dut
y, of culture, of progress--to the future. We ofte
n made fun of them and played jokes on them, but i
n our hearts we trusted them. The idea of authorit
y, which they represented, was associated in our m
inds with a greater insight and a manlier wisdom. 
But the first death we saw shattered this belief. 
We had to recognize that our generation was more t
o be trusted than theirs. They surpassed us only i
n phrases and in cleverness. The first bombardment
 showed us our mistake, and under it the world as 
they had taught it to us broke in pieces. While th
ey continued to write and talk, we saw the wounded
 and dying. While they taught that duty to one's c
ountry is the greatest thing, we already knew that
 death-throes are stronger. But for all that we we
re no mutineers, no deserters, no cowards--they we
re very free with all these expressions. We loved 
our country as much as they, we went courageously 
into every action; but also we distinguished the f
alse from the true, we had suddenly learned to see
. And we saw that there was nothing of their world
 left. We were all at once terribly alone; and alo
ne we must see it through. * * Before going over t
o see Kemmerich we pack up his things: he will nee
d them on the way back. In the dressing station th
ere is great activity; it reeks as ever of carboli
c, ether, and sweat. Most of us are accustomed to 
this in the billets, but here it makes one feel fa
int. We ask for Kemmerich. He lies in a large room
 and receives us with feeble expressions of joy an
d helpless agitation. While he was unconscious som
eone had stolen his watch. Müller shakes his head:
 "I always told you that nobody should carry as go
od a watch as that." Müller is rather crude and ta
ctless, otherwise he would hold his tongue, for an
ybody can see that Kemmerich will never come out o
f this place again. Whether he finds his watch or 
not will make no difference. At the most one will 
only be able to send it to his people. "How goes i
t, Franz?" asks Kropp. Kemmerich's head sinks. "No
t so bad ... but I have such a damned pain in my f
oot." We look at his bed covering. His leg lies un
der a wire basket. The bed covering arches over it
. I kick Müller on the shin, for he is just about 
to tell Kemmerich what the orderlies told us outsi
de: that Kemmerich has lost his foot. The leg is a
mputated. He looks ghastly, yellow, and wan. In hi
s face there are already the strained lines that w
e know so well, we have seen them now hundreds of 
times. They are not so much lines as marks. Under 
the skin the life no longer pulses, it has already
 pressed out to the boundaries of the body. Death 
is working through from within. It already has com
mand in the eyes. Here lies our comrade, Kemmerich
, who a little while ago was roasting horse-flesh 
with us and squatting in the shell-holes. He it is
 still and yet it is not he any longer. His featur
es have become uncertain and faint, like a photogr
aphic plate on which two pictures have been taken.
 Even his voice sounds like ashes. I think of the 
time when we went away. His mother, a good plump m
atron, brought him to the station. She wept contin
ually, her face was bloated and swollen. Kemmerich
 felt embarrassed, for she was the least composed 
of all; she simply dissolved into fat and water. T
hen she caught sight of me and took hold of my arm
 again and again, and implored me to look after Fr
anz out there. Indeed he did have a face like a ch
ild, and such frail bones that after four weeks pa
ck-carrying he already had flat feet. But how can 
a man look after anyone in the field! "Now you wil
l soon be going home," says Kropp. "You would have
 had to wait at least three or four months for you
r leave." Kemmerich nods. I cannot bear to look at
 his hands, they are like wax. Under the nails is 
the dirt of the trenches, it shows through blue-bl
ack like poison. It strikes me that these nails wi
ll continue to grow like long fantastic cellar-pla
nts long after Kemmerich breathes no more. I see t
he picture before me. They twist themselves into c
orkscrews and grow and grow, and with them the hai
r on the decayed skull, just like grass in a good 
soil, just like grass, how can it be possible---- 
Müller leans over. "We have brought your things, F
ranz." Kemmerich signs with his hand. "Put them un
der the bed." Müller does so. Kemmerich starts on 
again about the watch. How can one calm him withou
t making him suspicious? Müller reappears with a p
air of airman's boots. They are fine English boots
 of soft, yellow leather which reach to the knee a
nd lace all the way--they are things to be coveted
. Müller is delighted at the sight of them. He mat
ches their soles against his own clumsy boots and 
says: "Will you be taking them with you then, Fran
z?" We all three have the same thought; even if he
 should get better, he would be able to use only o
ne--they are no use to him. But as things are now 
it is a pity that they should stay here; the order
lies will of course grab them as soon as he is dea
d. "Won't you leave them with us?" Müller repeats.
 Kemmerich doesn't want to. They are his most priz
ed possessions. "Well, we could exchange," suggest
s Müller again. "Out here one can make some use of
 them." Still Kemmerich is not to be moved. I trea
d on Müller's foot; reluctantly he puts the fine b
oots back again under the bed. We talk a little mo
re and then take our leave. "Cheerio, Franz." I pr
omise him to come back in the morning. Müller talk
s of doing so too. He is thinking of the lace-up b
oots and means to be on the spot. Kemmerich groans
. He is feverish. We get hold of an orderly outsid
e and ask him to give Kemmerich a dose of morphia.
 He refuses. "If we were to give morphia to everyo
ne we would have to have tubs full----" "You only 
attend to officers properly," says Kropp viciously
. I hastily intervene and give him a cigarette. He
 takes it. "Are you usually allowed to give it, th
en?" I ask him. He is annoyed. "If you don't think
 so, then why do you ask?" I press a couple more c
igarettes into his hand. "Do us the favour----" "W
ell, all right," he says. Kropp goes in with him. 
He doesn't trust him and wants to see. We wait out
side. Müller returns to the subject of the boots. 
"They would fit me perfectly. In these boots I get
 blister after blister. Do you think he will last 
till to-morrow after drill? If he passes out in th
e night, we know where the boots----" Kropp return
s. "Do you think----?" he asks. "Done for," says M
üller emphatically. We go back to the huts. I thin
k of the letter that I must write to-morrow to Kem
merich's mother. I am freezing. I could do with a 
tot of rum. Müller pulls up some grass and chews i
t. Suddenly little Kropp throws his cigarette away
, stamps on it savagely, and looking round him wit
h a broken and distracted face, stammers: "Damned 
shit, the damned shit!" We walk on for a long time
. Kropp has calmed himself; we understand: he sees
 red, out here every man gets like that sometime. 
"What has Kantorek written to you?" Müller asks hi
m. He laughs. "We are the Iron Youth." We all thre
e smile bitterly. Kropp rails: he is glad that he 
can speak. Yes, that's the way they think, these h
undred thousand Kantoreks! Iron Youth. Youth! We a
re none of us more than twenty years old. But youn
g? Youth? That is long ago. We are old folk. CHAPT
ER II It is strange to think that at home in the d
rawer of my writing table there lies the beginning
 of a play called "Saul" and a bundle of poems. Ma
ny an evening I have worked over them--we all did 
something of the kind--but that has become so unre
al to me that I cannot comprehend it any more. Our
 early life is cut off from the moment we came her
e, and that without our lifting a hand. We often t
ry to look back on it and to find an explanation, 
but never quite succeed. For us young men of twent
y everything is extraordinarily vague, for Kropp, 
Müller, Leer, and me, for all of us whom Kantorek 
calls the "Iron Youth." All the older men are link
ed up with their previous life. They have wives, c
hildren, occupations, and interests, they have a b
ackground which is so strong that the war cannot o
bliterate it. We young men of twenty, however, hav
e only our parents, and some, perhaps, a girl--tha
t is not much, for at our age the influence of par
ents is at its weakest and girls have not yet got 
a hold over us. Besides this there was little else
--some enthusiasm, a few hobbies, and our school. 
Beyond this our life did not extend. And of this n
othing remains. Kantorek would say that we stood o
n the threshold of life. And so it would seem. We 
had as yet taken no root. The war swept us away. F
or the others, the older men, it is but an interru
ption. They are able to think beyond it. We, howev
er, have been gripped by it and do not know what t
he end may be. We know only that in some strange a
nd melancholy way we have become a waste land. All
 the same, we are not often sad. * * Though Müller
 would be delighted to have Kemmerich's boots, he 
is really quite as sympathetic as another who coul
d not bear to think of such a thing for grief. He 
merely sees things clearly. Were Kemmerich able to
 make any use of the boots, then Müller would rath
er go barefoot over barbed wire than scheme how to
 get hold of them. But as it is the boots are quit
e inappropriate to Kemmerich's circumstances, wher
eas Müller can make good use of them. Kemmerich wi
ll die; it is immaterial who gets them. Why, then,
 should Müller not succeed to them? he has more ri
ght than a hospital orderly. When Kemmerich is dea
d it will be too late. Therefore Müller is already
 on the watch. We have lost all sense of other con
siderations, because they are artificial. Only the
 facts are real and important for us. And good boo
ts are scarce. * * Once it was different. When we 
went to the district-commandant to enlist, we were
 a class of twenty young men, many of whom proudly
 shaved for the first time before going to the bar
racks. We had no definite plans for our future. Ou
r thoughts of a career and occupation were as yet 
of too unpractical a character to furnish any sche
me of life. We were still crammed full of vague id
eas which gave to life, and to the war also, an id
eal and almost romantic character. We were trained
 in the army for ten weeks and in this time more p
rofoundly influenced than by ten years at school. 
We learned that a bright button is weightier than 
four volumes of Schopenhauer. At first astonished,
 then embittered, and finally indifferent, we reco
gnized that what matters is not the mind but the b
oot brush, not intelligence but the system, not fr
eedom but drill. We became soldiers with eagerness
 and enthusiasm, but they have done everything to 
knock that out of us. After three weeks it was no 
longer incomprehensible to us that a braided postm
an should have more authority over us than had for
merly our parents, our teachers, and the whole gam
ut of culture from Plato to Goethe. With our young
, awakened eyes we saw that the classical concepti
on of the Fatherland held by our teachers resolved
 itself here into a renunciation of personality su
ch as one would not ask of the meanest servant--sa
lutes, springing to attention, parade-marches, pre
senting arms, right wheel, left wheel, clicking th
e heels, insults, and a thousand pettifogging deta
ils. We had fancied our task would be different, o
nly to find we were to be trained for heroism as t
hough we were circus-ponies. But we soon accustome
d ourselves to it. We learned in fact that some pa
rt of these things was necessary, but the rest mer
ely show. Soldiers have a fine nose for such disti
nctions. * * By threes and fours our class was sca
ttered over the platoons amongst Frisian fishermen
, peasants, and labourers with whom we soon made f
riends. Kropp, Müller, Kemmerich, and I went to No
. 9 platoon under Corporal Himmelstoss. He had the
 reputation of being the strictest disciplinarian 
in the camp, and was proud of it. He was a small u
ndersized fellow with a foxy, waxed moustache, who
 had seen twelve years service and was in civil li
fe a postman. He had a special dislike for Kropp, 
Tjaden, Westhus, and me, because he sensed a quiet
 defiance. I have remade his bed fourteen times in
 one morning. Each time he had some fault to find 
and pulled it to pieces. I have kneaded a pair of 
prehistoric boots that were as hard as iron for tw
enty hours--with intervals of course--until they b
ecame as soft as butter and not even Himmelstoss c
ould find anything more to do to them; under his o
rders I have scrubbed out the Corporals' Mess with
 a tooth-brush. Kropp and I were given the job of 
clearing the barrack-square of snow with a hand-br
oom and a dust-pan, and we would have gone on till
 we were frozen had not a lieutenant accidentally 
appeared who sent us off, and hauled Himmelstoss o
ver the coals. But the only result of this was to 
make Himmelstoss hate us more. For six weeks conse
cutively I did guard every Sunday and was hut-orde
rly for the same length of time. With full pack an
d rifle I have had to practise on a soft, wet, new
ly ploughed field the "Prepare to advance, advance
!" and the "Lie down!" until I was one lump of mud
 and finally collapsed. Four hours later I had to 
report to Himmelstoss with my clothes scrubbed cle
an, my hands chafed and bleeding. Together with Kr
opp, Westhus, and Tjaden I have stood at attention
 in a hard frost without gloves for a quarter of a
n hour at a stretch, while Himmelstoss watched for
 the slightest movement of our bare fingers on the
 steel barrel of the rifle. I have run eight times
 from the top floor of the barracks down to the co
urtyard in my shirt at two o'clock in the morning 
because my drawers projected three inches beyond t
he edge of the stool on which one had to stack all
 one's things. Alongside me ran the corporal, Himm
elstoss, and trod on my bare toes. At bayonet-prac
tice I had constantly to fight with Himmelstoss, I
 with a heavy iron weapon whilst he had a handy wo
oden one with which he easily struck my arms till 
they were black and blue. Once, indeed, I became s
o infuriated that I ran at him blindly and gave hi
m a mighty jab in the stomach and knocked him down
. When he reported me the company commander laughe
d at him and told him he ought to keep his eyes op
en; he understood Himmelstoss, and apparently was 
not displeased at his discomfiture. I became a pas
t master on the parallel bars and strove to surpas
s my instructor at physical jerks;--we have trembl
ed at the mere sound of his voice, but this runawa
y post-horse never got the better of us. One Sunda
y as Kropp and I were lugging a latrine-bucket on 
a pole across the barrack-yard, Himmelstoss came b
y, all polished up and spry for going out. He plan
ted himself in front of us and asked how we liked 
the job. In spite of ourselves we tripped and empt
ied the bucket over his legs. He raved, but the li
mit had been reached. "That means clink," he yelle
d. But Kropp had had enough. "There'll be an inqui
ry first," he said, "and then we'll unload." "Mind
 how you speak to a non-commissioned officer!" baw
led Himmelstoss. "Have you lost your senses? You w
ait till you're spoken to. What will you do, anywa
y?" "Show you up, Corporal," said Kropp, his thumb
s in line with the seams of his trousers. Himmelst
oss saw what we meant and went off without saying 
a word. But before he disappeared he growled: "You
'll drink this!"--but it was the end of his author
ity. He tried it on once more in the ploughed fiel
d with his "Prepare to advance, advance" and "Lie 
down." We obeyed each order, since an order's an o
rder and has to be obeyed. But we did it so slowly
 that Himmelstoss became desperate. Carefully we w
ent down on our knees, then on our hands, and so o
n; in the meantime, quite infuriated, he had given
 another command. But before we had even begun to 
sweat he was hoarse. After that he left us in peac
e. He did indeed always refer to us as swine, but 
there was, nevertheless, a certain respect in his 
tone. There were many other staff corporals, the m
ajority of whom were more decent. But above all ea
ch of them wanted to keep his good job there at ho
me as long as possible, and that he could do only 
by being strict with the recruits. Practically eve
ry conceivable polishing job in the entire camp fe
ll to us and we often howled with rage. Many of us
 became ill through it; Wolf actually died of infl
ammation of the lung. But we would have felt ridic
ulous had we hauled down our colours. We became ha
rd, suspicious, pitiless, vicious, tough--and that
 was good; for these attributes had been entirely 
lacking in us. Had we gone into the trenches witho
ut this period of training most of us would certai
nly have gone mad. Only thus were we prepared for 
what awaited us. We did not break down, but endure
d; our twenty years, which made many another thing
 so grievous, helped us in this. But by far the mo
st important was that it awakened in us a strong, 
practical sense of _esprit de corps_, which in the
 field developed into the finest thing that arose 
out of the war--comradeship. * * I sit by Kemmeric
h's bed. He is sinking steadily. Around us is a gr
eat commotion. A hospital train has arrived and th
e wounded fit to be moved are being selected. The 
doctor passes by Kemmerich's bed without once look
ing at him. "Next time, Franz," I say. He raises h
imself on the pillow with his elbows. "They have a
mputated my leg." He knows it too then. I nod and 
answer: "You must be thankful you've come off with
 that." He is silent. I resume: "It might have bee
n both legs, Franz. Wegeler has lost his right arm
. That's much worse. Besides, you will be going ho
me." He looks at me. "Do you think so?" "Of course
." "Do you think so?" he repeats. "Sure, Franz. On
ce you've got over the operation." He beckons me t
o bend down. I stoop over him and he whispers: "I 
don't think so." "Don't talk rubbish, Franz, in a 
couple of days you'll see for yourself. What is it
 anyway--an amputated leg? here they patch up far 
worse things than that." He lifts one hand. "Look 
here though, these fingers." "That's the result of
 the operation. Just eat decently and you'll soon 
be well again. Do they look after you properly?" H
e points to a dish that is still half full. I get 
excited. "Franz, you must eat. Eating is the main 
thing. That looks good too." He turns away. After 
a pause he says slowly: "I wanted to become a head
-forester once." "So you may still," I assure him.
 "There are splendid artificial limbs now, you'd h
ardly know there was anything missing. They are fi
xed on to the muscles. You can move the fingers an
d work and even write with an artificial hand. And
 besides, they will always be making new improveme
nts." For a while he lies still. Then he says: "Yo
u can take my lace-up boots with you for Müller." 
I nod and wonder what to say to encourage him. His
 lips have fallen away, his mouth has become large
r, his teeth stick out and look as though they wer
e made of chalk. The flesh melts, the forehead bul
ges more prominently, the cheek-bones protrude. Th
e skeleton is working itself through. The eyes are
 already sunken in. In a couple of hours it will b
e over. He is not the first that I have seen thus;
 but we grew up together and that always makes it 
a bit different. I have copied his essays. At scho
ol he used to wear a brown coat with a belt and sh
iny sleeves. He was the only one of us, too, who c
ould do the giant's turn on the horizontal bar. Hi
s hair flew in his face like silk when he did it. 
Kantorek was proud of him for it. But he couldn't 
endure cigarettes. His skin was very white; he had
 something of the girl about him. I glance at my b
oots. They are big and clumsy, the breeches are tu
cked into them, and standing up one looks well-bui
lt and powerful in these great drain-pipes. But wh
en we go bathing and strip, suddenly we have slend
er legs again and slight shoulders. We are no long
er soldiers but little more than boys; no one woul
d believe that we could carry packs. It is a stran
ge moment when we stand naked; then we become civi
lians, and almost feel ourselves to be so. When ba
thing Franz Kemmerich looked as slight and frail a
s a child. There he lies now--but why? The whole w
orld ought to pass by this bed and say: "That is F
ranz Kemmerich, nineteen and a half years old, he 
doesn't want to die. Let him not die!" My thoughts
 become confused. This atmosphere of carbolic and 
gangrene clogs the lungs, it is a thick gruel, it 
suffocates. It grows dark. Kemmerich's face change
s colour, it lifts from the pillow and is so pale 
that it gleams. The mouth moves slightly. I draw n
ear to him. He whispers: "If you find my watch, se
nd it home----" I do not reply. It is no use any m
ore. No one can console him. I am wretched with he
lplessness. This forehead with its hollow temples,
 this mouth that is now merely a slit, this sharp 
nose! And the fat, weeping woman at home to whom I
 must write. If only the letter were sent off alre
ady! Hospital-orderlies go to and fro with bottles
 and pails. One of them comes up, casts a glance a
t Kemmerich and goes away again. You can see he is
 waiting, apparently he wants the bed. I bend over
 Franz and talk to him as though that could save h
im: "Perhaps you will go to the convalescent home 
at Klosterberg, among the villas, Franz. Then you 
can look out from the window across the fields to 
the two trees on the horizon. It is the loveliest 
time of the year now, when the corn ripens; at eve
ning the fields in the sunlight look like mother-o
f-pearl. And the lane of poplars by the Klosterbac
h, where we used to catch sticklebacks! You can bu
ild an aquarium again and keep fish in it, and you
 can go out without asking anyone, you can even pl
ay the piano if you want to." I lean down over his
 face which lies in the shadow. He still breathes,
 lightly. His face is wet, he is crying. What a fi
ne mess I have made of it with my foolish talk! "B
ut Franz"--I put my arm round his shoulder and put
 my face against his. "Will you sleep now?" He doe
s not answer. The tears run down his cheeks. I wou
ld like to wipe them away but my handkerchief is t
oo dirty. An hour passes. I sit tensely and watch 
his every movement in case he may perhaps say some
thing. What if he were to open his mouth and cry o
ut! But he only weeps, his head turned aside. He d
oes not speak of his mother or his brothers and si
sters. He says nothing; all that lies behind him; 
he is entirely alone now with his little life of n
ineteen years, and cries because it leaves him. Th
is is the most disturbing and hardest parting that
 ever I have seen, although it was pretty bad too 
with Tiedjen, who called for his mother--a big bea
r of a fellow who, with wild eyes full of terror, 
held off the doctor from his bed with a dagger unt
il he collapsed. Suddenly Kemmerich groans and beg
ins to gurgle. I jump up, stumble outside and dema
nd: "Where is the doctor? Where is the doctor?" As
 I catch sight of the white apron I seize hold of 
it: "Come quick, Franz Kemmerich is dying." He fre
es himself and asks an orderly standing by: "Which
 will that be?" He says: "Bed 26, amputated thigh.
" He sniffs: "How should I know anything about it,
 I've amputated five legs to-day"; he shoves me aw
ay, says to the hospital-orderly "You see to it," 
and runs off to the operating room. I tremble with
 rage as I go along with the orderly. The man look
s at me and says: "One operation after another sin
ce five o'clock this morning. You know to-day alon
e there have been sixteen deaths--yours is the sev
enteenth. There will probably be twenty altogether
----" I become faint, all at once I cannot do any 
more. I won't revile any more, it is senseless, I 
could drop down and never rise up again. We are by
 Kemmerich's bed. He is dead. The face is still we
t from the tears. The eyes are half open and yello
w like old horn buttons. The orderly pokes me in t
he ribs. "Are you taking his things with you?" I n
od. He goes on: "We must take him away at once, we
 want the bed. Outside they are lying on the floor
." I collect the things, untie Kemmerich's identif
ication disc and take it away. The orderly asks ab
out the pay-book, I say that it is probably in the
 orderly-room, and go. Behind me they are already 
hauling Franz on to a water-proof sheet. Outside t
he door I am aware of the darkness and the wind as
 a deliverance. I breathe as deep as I can, and fe
el the breeze in my face, warm and soft as never b
efore. Thoughts of girls, of flowery meadows, of w
hite clouds suddenly come into my head. My feet be
gin to move forward in my boots, I go quicker, I r
un. Soldiers pass by me, I hear their voices witho
ut understanding. The earth is streaming with forc
es which pour into me through the soles of my feet
. The night crackles electrically, the front thund
ers like a concert of drums. My limbs move supply,
 I feel my joints strong, I breathe the air deeply
. The night lives, I live. I feel a hunger, greate
r than comes from the belly alone. Müller stands i
n front of the hut and waits for me. I give him th
e boots. We go in and he tries them on. They fit w
ell. He roots among his supplies and offers me a f
ine piece of saveloy. With it goes hot tea and rum
. CHAPTER III Reinforcements have arrived. The vac
ancies have been filled and the sacks of straw are
 already laid out in the huts. Some of them are ol
d hands, but there are twenty-five men of a later 
draft from the base. They are about two years youn
ger than us. Kropp nudges me: "Seen the infants?" 
I nod. We stick out our chests, shave in the open,
 shove our hands in our pockets, inspect the recru
its and feel ourselves to be stone-age veterans. K
atczinsky joins us. We stroll past the horse-boxes
 and go over to the reinforcements, who have alrea
dy been issued with gas-masks and coffee. "Long ti
me since you've had anything decent to eat, eh?" K
at asks one of the youngsters. He grimaces. "For b
reakfast, turnip-bread--lunch, turnip-stew--supper
, turnip-cutlets and turnip-salad." Kat gives a kn
owing whistle. "Bread made of turnips? You've been
 in luck, it's nothing new for it to be made of sa
wdust. But what do you say to haricot beans? Have 
some?" The youngster turns red: "You can't kid me.
" Katczinsky merely says: "Fetch your mess-tin." W
e follow curiously. He takes us to a tub beside hi
s straw sack. It is nearly half full of a stew of 
beef and beans. Katczinsky plants himself in front
 of it like a general and says: "Sharp eyes and li
ght fingers! That's what the Prussians say." We ar
e surprised. "Great guts, Kat, how did you come by
 that?" I ask him. "Ginger was glad I took it. I g
ave him three pieces of parachute silk for it. Col
d beans taste fine, too." Grudgingly he gives the 
youngster a portion and says: "Next time you come 
with your mess-tin have a cigar or a chew of tobac
co in your other hand. Get me?" Then he turns to u
s. "You get off scot free, of course." * * Katczin
sky never goes short; he has a sixth sense. There 
are such people everywhere but one does not apprec
iate it at first. Every company has one or two. Ka
tczinsky is the smartest I know. By trade he is a 
cobbler, I believe, but that hasn't anything to do
 with it; he understands all trades. It's a good t
hing to be friends with him, as Kropp and I are, a
nd Haie Westhus too, more or less. But Haie is rat
her the executive arm operating under Kat's orders
 when things come to blows. For that he has his qu
alifications. For example, we land at night in som
e entirely unknown spot, a sorry hole, that has be
en eaten out to the very walls. We are quartered i
n a small dark factory adapted to the purpose. The
re are beds in it, or rather bunks--a couple of wo
oden beams over which wire netting is stretched. W
ire netting is hard. And there's nothing to put on
 it. Our waterproof sheets are too thin. We use ou
r blankets to cover ourselves. Kat looks at the pl
ace and then says to Haie Westhus: "Come with me."
 They go off to explore. Half an hour later they a
re back again with arms full of straw. Kat has fou
nd a horse-box with straw in it. Now we might slee
p if we weren't so terribly hungry. Kropp asks an 
artilleryman who has been some time in this neighb
ourhood: "Is there a canteen anywhere abouts?" "Is
 there a what?" he laughs. "There's nothing to be 
had here. You won't find so much as a crust of bre
ad here." "Aren't there any inhabitants here at al
l then?" He spits. "Yes, a couple. But they mostly
 loaf round the cook house and beg." "That's a bad
 business!--Then we'll have to pull in our belts a
nd wait till the rations come up in the morning." 
But I see Kat has put on his cap. "Where to, Kat?"
 I ask. "Just to explore the place a bit." He stro
lls off. The artilleryman grins scornfully. "Let h
im explore! But don't be too hopeful about it." Di
sappointed we lie down and consider whether we cou
ldn't have a go at the iron rations. But it's too 
risky; so we try to get a wink of sleep. Kropp div
ides a cigarette and hands me half. Tjaden gives a
n account of his national dish--broad-beans and ba
con. He despises it when not flavoured with bog-my
rtle, and, "for God's sake, let it all be cooked t
ogether, not the potatoes, the beans, and the baco
n separately." Someone growls that he will pound T
jaden into bog-myrtle if he doesn't shut up. Then 
all becomes quiet in the big room--only the candle
s flickering from the necks of a couple of bottles
 and the artilleryman spitting every now and then.
 We stir a bit as the door opens and Kat appears. 
I think I must be dreaming; he has two loaves of b
read under his arm and a blood-stained sandbag ful
l of horse-flesh in his hand. The artilleryman's p
ipe drops from his mouth. He feels the bread. "Rea
l bread, by God! and still hot too!" Kat gives no 
explanation. He has the bread, the rest doesn't ma
tter. I'm sure that if he were planted down in the
 middle of the desert, in half an hour he would ha
ve gathered together a supper of roast meat, dates
, and wine. "Cut some wood," he says curtly to Hai
e. Then he hauls out a frying-pan from under his c
oat, and a handful of salt as well as a lump of fa
t from his pocket. He has thought of everything. H
aie makes a fire on the floor. It lights up the em
pty room of the factory. We climb out of bed. The 
artilleryman hesitates. He wonders whether to prai
se Kat and so perhaps gain a little for himself. B
ut Katczinsky doesn't even see him, he might as we
ll be thin air. He goes off cursing. Kat knows the
 way to roast horse-flesh so that it's tender. It 
shouldn't be put straight into the pan, that makes
 it tough. It should be boiled first in a little w
ater. With our knives we squat round in a circle a
nd fill our bellies. That is Kat. If for but one h
our in a year something eatable were to be had in 
some one place only, within that hour, as if moved
 by a vision, he would put on his cap, go out and 
walk directly there, as though following a compass
, and find it. He finds everything--if it is cold,
 a small stove and wood, hay and straw, a table an
d chairs--but above all food. It is uncanny; one w
ould think he conjured it out of the air. His mast
erpiece was four boxes of lobsters. Admittedly we 
would rather have had a good beef steak. * * We ha
ve settled ourselves on the sunny side of the hut.
 There is a smell of tar, of summer, and of sweaty
 feet. Kat sits beside me. He wants to talk. To-da
y we have been practising saluting because Tjaden 
failed to salute a major. Kat can't get it out of 
his head. "You see, we are losing the war because 
we can salute too well," he says. Kropp stalks up,
 with his breeches rolled up and his feet bare. He
 lays out his washed socks to dry on the grass. Ka
t turns his eyes to heaven, lets off a mighty fart
, and says apologetically: "Every little bean must
 be heard as well as seen." The two begin to argue
. At the same time they lay a bottle of beer on th
e result of an air-fight that's going on above us.
 Katczinsky won't budge from the opinion, which as
 an old Front-hog, he rhymes: Give 'em all the sam
e grub and all the same pay And the war would be o
ver and done in a day. Kropp on the other hand is 
a thinker. He proposes that a declaration of war s
hould be a kind of popular festival with entrance-
tickets and bands, like a bull fight. Then in the 
arena the ministers and generals of the two countr
ies, dressed in bathing-drawers and armed with clu
bs, can have it out among themselves. Whoever surv
ives, his country wins. That would be much simpler
 and more just than this arrangement, where the wr
ong people do the fighting. The subject is dropped
. Then the conversation turns to drill. A picture 
comes before me. Burning midday in the barrack-yar
d. The heat hangs over the square. The barracks ar
e deserted. Everything sleeps. All one hears is th
e drummers practising; they have installed themsel
ves anywhere and practise brokenly, dully, monoton
ously. What a concord! Midday heat, barrack-square
, and drummers beating! The windows of the barrack
s are empty and dark. From some of them trousers a
re hanging to dry. The rooms are cool and one look
s toward them longingly. O dark, musty platoon hut
s, with the iron bedsteads, the chequered bedding,
 the lockers and the stools! Even you can become t
he object of desire; out here you have a faint res
emblance to home; your rooms, full of the smell of
 stale food, sleep, smoke, and clothes! Katczinsky
 paints it all in lively colours. What would we no
t give to be able to go back to it! But we must no
t pursue that line of thought any further. Those e
arly morning hours of instruction--"What are the p
arts of the 98 rifle?"--the midday hours of physic
al training--"Pianist, forward! By the right, quic
k march. Report to the cook-house for potato-peeli
ng." We indulge in reminiscences. Kropp laughs sud
denly and says: "Change at Löhne!" That was our co
rporal's favourite game. Löhne is a railway juncti
on. In order that our fellows going on leave shoul
dn't get lost there, Himmelstoss used to practise 
the change in the barrack-room. We had to learn th
at at Löhne, to reach the branch-line, we must pas
s through a subway. The beds represented the subwa
y and each man stood at attention on the left side
 of his bed. Then came the command: "Change at Löh
ne!" and like lightning everyone scrambled under t
he bed to the opposite side. We practised this for
 a whole hour---- Meanwhile the German aeroplane h
as been shot down. Like a comet it bursts into a s
treamer of smoke and falls headlong. Kropp has los
t the bottle of beer. Disgruntled he counts out th
e money from his wallet. "Surely Himmelstoss was a
 very different fellow as a postman," say I, after
 Albert's disappointment has subsided. "Then how d
oes it come that he's such a bully as a drill-serg
eant?" The question revives Kropp, more particular
ly as he hears there's no more beer in the canteen
. "It's not only Himmelstoss, there are lots of th
em. As sure as they get a stripe or a star they be
come different men, just as though they'd swallowe
d concrete." "That's the uniform," I suggest. "Rou
ghly speaking it is," says Kat, and prepares for a
 long speech; "but the root of the matter lies els
ewhere. For instance, if you train a dog to eat po
tatoes and then afterwards put a piece of meat in 
front of him, he'll snap at it, it's his nature. A
nd if you give a man a little bit of authority he 
behaves just the same way, he snaps at it too. The
 things are precisely the same. In himself man is 
essentially a beast, only he butters it over like 
a slice of bread with a little decorum. The army i
s based on that; one man must always have power ov
er the other. The mischief is merely that each one
 has much too much power. A non-com. can torment a
 private, a lieutenant a non-com., a captain a lie
utenant, until he goes mad. And because they know 
they can, they all soon acquire the habit more or 
less. Take a simple case: we are marching back fro
m the parade-ground dog-tired. Then comes the orde
r to sing. We are glad enough to be able to trail 
arms but we sing spiritlessly. At once the company
 is turned about and has to do another hour's dril
l as punishment. On the march back the order to si
ng is given again, and once more we start. Now wha
t's the use of all that? It's simply that the comp
any commander's head has been turned by having so 
much power. And nobody blames him. On the contrary
, he is praised for being strict. That, of course,
 is only a trifling instance, but it holds also in
 very different affairs. Now I ask you: Let a man 
be whatever you like in peace-time, what occupatio
n is there in which he can behave like that withou
t getting a crack on the nose? He can only do that
 in the army. It goes to the heads of them all, yo
u see. And the more insignificant a man has been i
n civil life the worse it takes him." "They say, o
f course, there must be discipline," ventures Krop
p meditatively. "True," growls Kat, "they always d
o. And it may be so; still it oughtn't to become a
n abuse. But you try to explain that to a blacksmi
th or a labourer or a workman, you try to make tha
t clear to a simple tommy--and that's what most of
 them are here. All he understands is that he has 
been properly trained so that when he comes up to 
the front he thinks he knows exactly what he shoul
d do in every circumstance and what not. It's simp
ly amazing, I tell you, that the ordinary soldier 
survives so long up here in the front-line. Simply
 amazing!" No one protests. Everyone knows that dr
ill ceases only in the front-line and begins again
 a few miles behind, with all the absurdities of s
aluting and parade. It is an iron law that the sol
dier must be employed under every circumstance. He
re Tjaden comes up with a flushed face. He is so e
xcited that he stutters. Beaming with satisfaction
 he stammers out: "Himmelstoss is on his way. He's
 coming to the front!" * * Tjaden has a special gr
udge against Himmelstoss, because of the way he ed
ucated him in the barracks. Tjaden wets his bed, h
e does it at night in his sleep. Himmelstoss maint
ained that it was sheer laziness and invented a me
thod worthy of himself for curing Tjaden. He hunte
d up another piss-a-bed, named Kindervater, from a
 neighbouring hut, and quartered him with Tjaden. 
In the huts there were the usual bunks, one above 
the other in pairs, with mattresses of wire-nettin
g. Himmelstoss put these two so that one occupied 
the upper and the other the lower bunk. The man un
derneath was of course disgusted. The next night t
hey were changed over and the lower one put on top
 so that he could retaliate. That was Himmelstoss'
s system of self-education. The idea was low but n
ot ill-conceived. Unfortunately it accomplished no
thing because the first assumption was wrong: it w
as not laziness in either of them. Anyone who look
ed at their sallow skin could see that. The matter
 ended in one of them always sleeping on the floor
, where he frequently caught cold. Meanwhile Haie 
sits down beside us. He winks at me and rubs his p
aws thoughtfully. We once spent the finest day of 
our army-life together--the day before we left for
 the front. We had been allotted to one of the rec
ently formed regiments, but were first to be sent 
back for equipment to the garrison, not to the rei
nforcement-depot, of course, but to another barrac
ks. We were due to leave next morning early. In th
e evening we prepared ourselves to square accounts
 with Himmelstoss. We had sworn for weeks past to 
do this. Kropp had even gone so far as to propose 
entering the postal service in peace-time in order
 to be Himmelstoss's superior when he became a pos
tman again. He revelled in the thought of how he w
ould grind him. It was this that made it impossibl
e for him to crush us altogether--we always reckon
ed that later, at the end of the war, we would hav
e our revenge on him. In the meantime we decided t
o give him a good hiding. What could he do to us a
nyhow if he didn't recognize us and we left early 
the next morning? We knew which pub he used to vis
it every evening. Returning to the barracks he had
 to go along a dark, uninhabited road. There we wa
ited for him behind a pile of stones. I had a bed-
cover with me. We trembled with suspense, hoping h
e would be alone. At last we heard his footstep, w
hich we recognized easily, so often had we heard i
t in the mornings as the door flew open and he baw
led: "Get up!" "Alone?" whispered Kropp. "Alone." 
I slipped round the pile of stones with Tjaden. Hi
mmelstoss seemed a little elevated; he was singing
. His belt-buckle gleamed. He came on unsuspecting
ly. We seized the bed-cover, made a quick leap, th
rew it over his head from behind and pulled it rou
nd him so that he stood there in a white sack unab
le to raise his arms. The singing stopped. The nex
t moment Haie Westhus was there, and spreading out
 his arms he shoved us back in order to be first i
n. He put himself in position with evident satisfa
ction, raised his arm like a signal-mast and his h
and like a coal-shovel and fetched such a blow on 
the white sack as would have felled an ox. Himmels
toss was thrown down, he rolled five yards and sta
rted to yell. But we were prepared for that and ha
d brought a cushion. Haie squatted down, laid the 
cushion on his knees, felt where Himmelstoss's hea
d was and pressed it down on the pillow. Immediate
ly his voice was muffled. Haie let him get a gasp 
of air every so often, when he would give a mighty
 yell that was immediately hushed. Tjaden unbutton
ed Himmelstoss's braces and pulled down his trouse
rs, holding the whip meantime in his teeth. Then h
e stood up and set to work. It was a wonderful pic
ture: Himmelstoss on the ground; Haie bending over
 him with a fiendish grin and his mouth open with 
blood-lust, Himmelstoss's head on his knees; then 
the convulsed, striped drawers, the knock knees, e
xecuting at every blow most original movements in 
the lowered breeches, and towering over them like 
a woodcutter the indefatigable Tjaden. In the end 
we had to drag him away to get our turn. Finally H
aie stood Himmelstoss on his feet again and gave o
ne last personal remonstrance. As he stretched out
 his right arm preparatory to giving him a box on 
the ear he looked as if he were going to reach dow
n a star. Himmelstoss staggered. Haie stood him up
 again, made ready and fetched him a second, well-
aimed beauty with the left hand. Himmelstoss yelle
d and fell down on all fours cursing. His striped 
postman's backside gleamed in the moonlight. We di
sappeared at full speed. Haie looked round once ag
ain and said wrathfully, satisfied and rather myst
eriously: "Revenge is black-pudding." Himmelstoss 
ought to have been pleased; his saying that we sho
uld each educate one another had borne fruit for h
imself. We had become successful students of his m
ethod. He never discovered whom he had to thank fo
r the business. At any rate he scored a bed-cover 
out of it; for when we returned a few hours later 
to look for it, it was no longer to be found. That
 evening's work made us more or less content to le
ave next morning. And an old buffer was pleased to
 describe us as "young heroes." CHAPTER IV We have
 to go up on wiring fatigue. The motor lorries rol
l up after dark. We climb in. It is a warm evening
 and the twilight seems like a canopy under whose 
shelter we feel drawn together. Even the stingy Tj
aden gives me a cigarette and then a light. We sta
nd jammed in together, shoulder to shoulder, there
 is no room to sit. But we do not expect that. Mül
ler is in a good mood for once; he is wearing his 
new boots. The engines drone, the lorries bump and
 rattle. The roads are worn and full of holes. We 
dare not show a light so we lurch along and are of
ten almost pitched out. That does not worry us, ho
wever. It can happen if it likes; a broken arm is 
better than a hole in the guts, and many a man wou
ld be thankful enough for such a chance of finding
 his way home again. Beside us stream the munition
-columns in long files. They are making the pace, 
they overtake us going forward. We joke with them 
and they answer back. A wall becomes visible, it b
elongs to a house which lies on the side of the ro
ad. I suddenly prick up my ears. Am I deceived? Ag
ain I hear distinctly the cackle of geese. A glanc
e at Katczinsky--a glance from him to me; we under
stand one another. "Kat, I hear some aspirants for
 the frying-pan over there." He nods. "It will be 
attended to when we come back. I have their number
." Of course Kat has their number. He knows all ab
out every leg of goose within a radius of fifteen 
miles. The lorries arrive at the artillery lines. 
The gun-emplacements are camouflaged with bushes a
gainst aerial observation, and look like a kind of
 military Feast of the Tabernacles. These branches
 might seem gay and cheerful were not cannon embow
ered there. The air becomes acrid with the smoke o
f the guns and the fog. The fumes of powder taste 
bitter on the tongue. The roar of the guns makes o
ur lorry stagger, the reverberation rolls raging a
way to the rear, everything quakes. Our faces chan
ge imperceptibly. We are not, indeed, in the front
-line, but only in the reserves, yet in every face
 can be read: This is the Front, now we are within
 its embrace. It is not fear. Men who have been up
 as often as we have become thick skinned. Only th
e young recruits are agitated. Kat explains to the
m: "That was a twelve-inch. You hear the explosion
 first and afterwards comes the sound of the gun."
 But the hollow sound of the firing does not reach
 us. It is swallowed up in the general murmur of t
he front. Kat listens: "There'll be a bombardment 
to-night." We all listen. The front is restless. "
The Tommies are firing already," says Kropp. The s
helling can be heard distinctly. It is the English
 batteries to the right of our section. They are b
eginning an hour too soon. According to us they st
art punctually at ten o'clock. "What's got them?" 
says Müller, "their clocks must be fast." "There'l
l be a bombardment, I tell you, I can feel it in m
y bones." Kat shrugs his shoulders. Three shells l
and beside us. The burst of flame shoots across th
e fog, the fragments howl and drone. We shiver and
 are glad to think that we shall be back in the hu
ts early in the morning. Our faces are neither pal
er nor more flushed than usual; they are not more 
tense nor more flabby--and yet they are changed. W
e feel that in our blood a contact has shot home. 
That is no figure of speech; it is fact. It is the
 front, the consciousness of the front, that makes
 this contact. The moment that the first shells wh
istle over and the air is rent with the explosions
 there is suddenly in our veins, in our hands, in 
our eyes a tense waiting, a watching, a heightened
 alertness, a strange sharpening of the senses. Th
e body with one bound is in full readiness. It oft
en seems to me as though it were the vibrating, sh
uddering air that with a noiseless leap springs up
on us; or as though the front itself emitted an el
ectric current which awakened unknown nerve-centre
s. Every time it is the same. We start out for the
 front plain soldiers, either cheerful or gloomy: 
then come the first gun-emplacements and every wor
d of our speech has a new ring. When Kat stands in
 front of the hut and says: "There'll be a bombard
ment," that is merely his own opinion; but if he s
ays it here, then the sentence has the sharpness o
f a bayonet in the moonlight, it cuts clean throug
h the thought, it thrusts nearer and speaks to thi
s unknown thing that is awakened in us, a dark mea
ning--"There'll be a bombardment." Perhaps it is o
ur inner and most secret life that shivers and fal
ls on guard. * * To me the front is a mysterious w
hirlpool. Though I am in still water far away from
 its centre, I feel the whirl of the vortex suckin
g me slowly, irresistibly, inescapably into itself
. From the earth, from the air, sustaining forces 
pour into us--mostly from the earth. To no man doe
s the earth mean so much as to the soldier. When h
e presses himself down upon her long and powerfull
y, when he buries his face and his limbs deep in h
er from the fear of death by shell-fire, then she 
is his only friend, his brother, his mother; he st
ifles his terror and his cries in her silence and 
her security; she shelters him and gives him a new
 lease of ten seconds of life, receives him again 
and often for ever. Earth!--Earth!--Earth! Earth w
ith thy folds, and hollows and holes, into which a
 man may fling himself and crouch down! In the spa
sm of terror, under the hailing of annihilation, i
n the bellowing death of the explosions, O Earth, 
thou grantest us the great resisting surge of new-
won life. Our being, almost utterly carried away b
y the fury of the storm, streams back through our 
hands from thee, and we, thy redeemed ones, bury o
urselves in thee, and through the long minutes in 
a mute agony of hope bite into thee with our lips!
 At the sound of the first droning of the shells w
e rush back, in one part of our being, a thousand 
years. By the animal instinct that is awakened in 
us we are led and protected. It is not conscious; 
it is far quicker, much more sure, less fallible, 
than consciousness. One cannot explain it. A man i
s walking along without thought or heed;--suddenly
 he throws himself down on the ground and a storm 
of fragments flies harmlessly over him;--yet he ca
nnot remember either to have heard the shell comin
g or to have thought of flinging himself down. But
 had he not abandoned himself to the impulse he wo
uld now be a heap of mangled flesh. It is this oth
er, this second sight in us, that has thrown us to
 the ground and saved us, without our knowing how.
 If it were not so, there would not be one man ali
ve from Flanders to the Vosges. We march up, moody
 or good-tempered soldiers--we reach the zone wher
e the front begins and become on the instant human
 animals. * * An indigent looking wood receives us
. We pass by the soup-kitchens. Under cover of the
 wood we climb out. The lorries turn back. They ar
e to collect us again in the morning, before dawn.
 Mist and the smoke of guns lie breast-high over t
he fields. The moon is shining. Along the road tro
ops file. Their helmets gleam softly in the moonli
ght. The heads and the rifles stand out above the 
white mist, nodding heads, rocking carriers of gun
s. Farther on the mist ends. Here the heads become
 figures; coats, trousers, and boots appear out of
 the mist as from a milky pool. They become a colu
mn. The column marches on, straight ahead, the fig
ures resolve themselves into a block, individuals 
are no longer recognizable, the dark wedge presses
 onward, fantastically topped by the heads and wea
pons floating off on the milky pool. A column--not
 men at all. Guns and munition wagons are moving a
long a cross-road. The backs of the horses shine i
n the moonlight, their movements are beautiful, th
ey toss their heads, and their eyes gleam. The gun
s and the wagons float before the dim background o
f the moonlit landscape, the riders in their steel
 helmets resemble knights of a forgotten time; it 
is strangely beautiful and arresting. We push on t
o the pioneer dump. Some of us load our shoulders 
with pointed and twisted iron stakes; others thrus
t smooth iron rods through rolls of wire and go of
f with them. The burdens are awkward and heavy. Th
e ground becomes more broken. From ahead come warn
ings: "Look out, deep shell-hole on the left"--"Mi
nd, trenches"---- Our eyes peer out, our feet and 
our sticks feel in front of us before they take th
e weight of the body. Suddenly the line halts; I b
ump my face against the roll of wire carried by th
e man in front and curse. There are some shell-sma
shed lorries in the road. Another order: "Cigarett
es and pipes out," We are getting near the line. I
n the meantime it has become pitch dark. We skirt 
a small wood and then have the front line immediat
ely before us. An uncertain, red glow spreads alon
g the sky line from one end to the other. It is in
 perpetual movement, punctuated with the bursts of
 flame from the muzzles of the batteries. Balls of
 light rise up high above it, silver and red spher
es which explode and rain down in showers of red, 
white, and green stars. French rockets go up, whic
h unfold a silk parachute to the air and drift slo
wly down. They light up everything as bright as da
y, their light shines on us and we see our shadows
 sharply outlined on the ground. They hover for th
e space of a minute before they burn out. Immediat
ely fresh ones shoot up to the sky, and again gree
n, red, and blue stars. "Bombardment," says Kat. T
he thunder of the guns swells to a single heavy ro
ar and then breaks up again into separate explosio
ns. The dry bursts of the machine-guns rattle. Abo
ve us the air teems with invisible swift movement,
 with howls, pipings, and hisses. They are the sma
ller shells;--and amongst them, booming through th
e night like an organ, go the great coal-boxes and
 the heavies. They have a hoarse, distant bellow l
ike a rutting stag and make their way high above t
he howl and whistle of the smaller shells. It remi
nds me of flocks of wild geese when I hear them. L
ast autumn the wild geese flew day after day acros
s the path of the shells. The searchlights begin t
o sweep the dark sky. They slide along it like gig
antic tapering rulers. One of them pauses, and qui
vers a little. Immediately a second is beside him,
 a black insect is caught between them and tries t
o escape--the airman. He hesitates, is blinded and
 falls. * * At regular intervals we ram in the iro
n stakes. Two men hold a roll and the others spool
 off the barbed wire. It is that awful stuff with 
close-set, long spikes. I am not used to unrolling
 it and tear my hand. After a few hours it is done
. But there is still some time before the lorries 
come. Most of us lie down and sleep. I try also, b
ut it has turned too chilly. Near to the sea one i
s constantly waked by the cold. Once I fall fast a
sleep. Then waking suddenly with a start I do not 
know where I am. I see the stars, I see the rocket
s, and for a moment have the impression that I hav
e fallen asleep at a garden fête. I don't know whe
ther it is morning or evening, I lie in the pale c
radle of the twilight, and listen for soft words w
hich will come, soft and near--am I crying? I put 
my hand to my eyes, it is so fantastic, am I a chi
ld? Smooth skin:--it lasts only a second, then I r
ecognize the silhouette of Katczinsky. The old vet
eran, he sits quietly and smokes his pipe--a cover
ed pipe of course. When he sees I am awake, he say
s: "That gave you a fright. It was only a nose-cap
, it landed in the bushes over there." I sit up, I
 feel myself strangely alone. It's good Kat is the
re. He gazes thoughtfully at the front and says: "
Mighty fine fire-works if they weren't so dangerou
s." One lands behind us. Two recruits jump up terr
ified. A couple of minutes later another comes ove
r, nearer this time. Kat knocks out his pipe. "It 
makes a glow." Then it begins in earnest. We crawl
 away as well as we can in our haste. The next lan
ds fair among us. Two fellows cry out. Green rocke
ts shoot up on the sky-line. Barrage. The mud flie
s high, fragments whizz past. The crack of the gun
s is heard long after the roar of the explosions. 
Beside us lies a fair-headed recruit in utter terr
or. He has buried his face in his hands, his helme
t has fallen off. I fish hold of it and try to put
 it back on his head. He looks up, pushes the helm
et off and like a child creeps under my arm, his h
ead close to my breast. The little shoulders heave
. Shoulders just like Kemmerich's. I let him be. S
o that the helmet should be of some use I stick it
 on his behind;--not for a jest, but out of consid
eration, since that is his highest part. And thoug
h there is plenty of meat there, a shot in it can 
be damned painful. Besides, a man has to lie a who
le month on his belly in the hospital, and afterwa
rds he would be almost sure to have a limp. It's g
ot someone pretty badly. Cries are heard between t
he explosions. At last it grows quiet. The fire ha
s lifted over us and is now dropping on the reserv
es. We risk a look. Red rockets shoot up to the sk
y. Apparently there's an attack coming. Where we a
re it is still quiet. I sit up and shake the recru
it by the shoulder. "All over, kid! It's all right
 this time." He looks round him dazedly. "You'll g
et used to it soon," I tell him. He sees his helme
t and puts it on. Gradually he comes to. Then sudd
enly he turns fiery red and looks confused. Cautio
usly he reaches his hand to his behind and looks a
t me dismally. I understand at once: Gun-shy. That
 wasn't the reason I had stuck his helmet over it.
 "That's no disgrace," I reassure him: "Many's the
 man before you has had his pants full after the f
irst bombardment. Go behind that bush there and th
row your underpants away. Get along----" * * He go
es off. Things become quieter, but the cries do no
t cease. "What's up, Albert?" I ask. "A couple of 
columns over there have got it in the neck." The c
ries continue. It is not men, they could not cry s
o terribly. "Wounded horses," says Kat. It's unend
urable. It is the moaning of the world, it is the 
martyred creation, wild with anguish, filled with 
terror, and groaning. We are pale. Detering stands
 up. "God! For God's sake! Shoot them!" He is a fa
rmer and very fond of horses. It gets under his sk
in. Then as if deliberately the fire dies down aga
in. The screaming of the beasts becomes louder. On
e can no longer distinguish whence in this now qui
et, silvery landscape it comes; ghostly, invisible
, it is everywhere, between heaven and earth it ro
lls on immeasurably. Detering raves and yells out:
 "Shoot them! Shoot them, can't you? damn you agai
n!" "They must look after the men first," says Kat
 quietly. We stand up and try to see where it is. 
If we could only see the animals we should be able
 to endure it better. Müller has a pair of glasses
. We see a dark group, bearers with stretchers, an
d larger black clumps moving about. Those are the 
wounded horses. But not all of them. Some gallop a
way in the distance, fall down, and then run on fa
rther. The belly of one is ripped open, the guts t
rail out. He becomes tangled in them and falls, th
en he stands up again. Detering raises his gun and
 aims. Kat hits it up in the air. "Are you mad----
?" Detering trembles and throws his rifle on the g
round. We sit down and hold our ears. But this app
alling noise, these groans and screams penetrate, 
they penetrate everywhere. We can bear almost anyt
hing. But now the sweat breaks out on us. We must 
get up and run, no matter where, but where these c
ries can no longer be heard. And it is not men, on
ly horses. From the dark group stretchers move off
 again. Then single shots crack out. The black hea
p is convulsed and becomes thinner. At last! But s
till it is not the end. The men cannot overtake th
e wounded beasts which fly in their pain, their wi
de open mouths full of anguish. One of the men goe
s down on his knee, a shot--one horse drops--anoth
er. The last one props himself on his forelegs and
 drags himself round in a circle like a merry-go-r
ound; squatting, it drags round in circles on its 
stiffened forelegs, apparently its back is broken.
 The soldier runs up and shoots it. Slowly, humbly
 it sinks to the ground. We take our hands from ou
r ears. The cries are silenced. Only a long-drawn,
 dying sigh still hangs on the air. Then again onl
y the rockets, the singing of the shells, and the 
stars--and they shine out wonderfully. Detering wa
lks up and down cursing: "Like to know what harm t
hey've done." He returns to it once again. His voi
ce is agitated, it sounds almost dignified as he s
ays: "I tell you it is the vilest baseness to use 
horses in the war." * * We go back. It is time we 
returned to the lorries. The sky is become a bit b
righter. Three o'clock in the morning. The breeze 
is fresh and cool, the pale hour makes our faces l
ook grey. We trudge onward in single file through 
the trenches and shell-holes and come again to the
 zone of mist. Katczinsky is restive, that's a bad
 sign. "What's up, Kat?" says Kropp. "I wish I wer
e back home." Home--he means the huts. "It won't l
ast much longer, Kat." He is nervous. "I don't kno
w, I don't know----" We come to the communication-
trench and then to the open fields. The little woo
d reappears; we know every foot of ground here. Th
ere's the cemetery with the mounds and the black c
rosses. That moment it breaks out behind us, swell
s, roars, and thunders. We duck down--a cloud of f
lame shoots up a hundred yards ahead of us. The ne
xt minute under a second explosion part of the woo
d rises slowly in the air, three or four trees sai
l up and then crash to pieces. The shells begin to
 hiss like safety-valves--heavy fire---- "Take cov
er!" yells somebody--"Cover!" The fields are flat,
 the wood is too distant and dangerous--the only c
over is the graveyard and the mounds. We stumble a
cross in the dark and as though spirited away ever
y man lies glued behind a mound. Not a moment too 
soon. The dark goes mad. It heaves and raves. Dark
nesses blacker than the night rush on us with gian
t strides, over us and away. The flames of the exp
losions light up the graveyard. There is no escape
 anywhere. By the light of the shells I try to get
 a view of the fields. They are a surging sea, dag
gers of flame from the explosions leap up like fou
ntains. It is impossible for anyone to break throu
gh it. The wood vanishes, it is pounded, crushed, 
torn to pieces. We must stay here in the grave-yar
d. The earth bursts before us. It rains clods. I f
eel a smack. My sleeve is torn away by a splinter.
 I shut my fist. No pain. Still that does not reas
sure me: wounds don't hurt till afterwards. I feel
 the arm all over. It is grazed but sound. Now a c
rack on the skull, I begin to lose consciousness. 
Like lightning the thought comes to me: Don't fain
t, sink down in the black broth and immediately co
me up to the top again. A splinter slashes into my
 helmet, but has travelled so far that it does not
 go through. I wipe the mud out of my eyes. A hole
 is torn up in front of me. Shells hardly ever lan
d in the same hole twice, I'll get into it. With o
ne bound I fling myself down and lie on the earth 
as flat as a fish; there it whistles again, quickl
y I crouch together, claw for cover, feel somethin
g on the left, shove in beside it, it gives way, I
 groan, the earth leaps, the blast thunders in my 
ears, I creep under the yielding thing, cover myse
lf with it, draw it over me, it is wood, cloth, co
ver, cover, miserable cover against the whizzing s
plinters. I open my eyes--my fingers grasp a sleev
e, an arm. A wounded man? I yell to him--no answer
--a dead man. My hand gropes farther, splinters of
 wood--now I remember again that we are lying in t
he graveyard. But the shelling is stronger than ev
erything. It wipes out the sensibilities, I merely
 crawl still deeper into the coffin, it should pro
tect me, and especially as Death himself lies in i
t too. Before me gapes the shell-hole. I grasp it 
with my eyes as with fists. With one leap I must b
e in it. There, I get a smack in the face, a hand 
clamps on to my shoulder--has the dead man waked u
p?--The hand shakes me, I turn my head, in the sec
ond of light I stare into the face of Katczinsky, 
he has his mouth wide open and is yelling. I hear 
nothing, he rattles me, comes nearer, in a momenta
ry lull his voice reaches me: "Gas--Gaas--Gaaas--P
ass it on." I grab for my gas-mask. Some distance 
from me there lies someone. I think of nothing but
 this: That fellow there must know: Gaaas--Gaaas--
-- I call, I lean toward him, I swipe at him with 
the satchel, he doesn't see--once again, again--he
 merely ducks--it's a recruit--I look at Kat despe
rately, he has his mask ready--I pull out mine too
, my helmet falls to one side, it slips over my fa
ce, I reach the man, his satchel is on the side ne
arest me, I seize the mask, pull it over his head,
 he understands, I let go and with a jump drop bac
k into the shell-hole. The dull thud of the gas-sh
ells mingles with the crashes of the high explosiv
es. A bell sounds between the explosions, gongs, a
nd metal clappers warning everyone--Gas--Gas--Gaas
. Someone plumps down behind me, another. I wipe t
he goggles of my mask clear of the moist breath. I
t is Kat, Kropp, and someone else. All four of us 
lie there in heavy, watchful suspense and breathe 
as lightly as possible. These first minutes with t
he mask decide between life and death: is it tight
ly woven? I remember the awful sights in the hospi
tal: the gas patients who in day-long suffocation 
cough their burnt lungs up in clots. Cautiously, t
he mouth applied to the valve, I breathe. The gas 
still creeps over the ground and sinks into all ho
llows. Like a big, soft jellyfish it floats into o
ur shell-hole and lolls there obscenely. I nudge K
at, it is better to crawl out and lie on top than 
to stay here where the gas collects most. But we d
on't get as far as that; a second bombardment begi
ns. It is no longer as though the shells roared; i
t is the earth itself raging. With a crash somethi
ng black bears down on us. It lands close beside u
s; a coffin thrown up. I see Kat move and I crawl 
across. The coffin has hit the fourth man in our h
ole on his outstretched arm. He tries to tear off 
his gas-mask with the other hand. Kropp seizes him
 just in time, twists the hand sharply behind his 
back and holds it fast. Kat and I proceed to free 
the wounded arm. The coffin lid is loose and burst
s open, we are easily able to pull it off, we toss
 the corpse out, it slides down to the bottom of t
he shell-hole, then we try to loosen the under-par
t. Fortunately the man swoons and Kropp is able to
 help us. We no longer have to be careful, but wor
k away till the coffin gives with a sigh before th
e spade that we have dug in under it. It has grown
 lighter. Kat takes a piece of the lid, places it 
under the shattered arm, and we wrap all our banda
ges round it. For the moment we can do no more. In
side the gas-mask my head booms and roars--it is n
igh bursting. My lungs are tight, they breathe alw
ays the same hot, used-up air, the veins on my tem
ples are swollen, I feel I am suffocating. A grey 
light filters through to us. I climb out over the 
edge of the shell-hole. In the dirty twilight lies
 a leg torn clean off; the boot is quite whole, I 
take that all in at a glance. Now someone stands u
p a few yards distant. I polish the windows, in my
 excitement they are immediately dimmed again, I p
eer through them, the man there no longer wears hi
s mask. I wait some seconds--he has not collapsed-
-he looks around and makes a few paces--rattling i
n my throat I tear my mask off too and fall down, 
the air streams into me like cold water, my eyes a
re bursting, the wave sweeps over me and extinguis
hes me. * * The shelling has ceased. I drag myself
 to the crater and tell the others. They take off 
their masks. We lift up the wounded man, one takin
g his splintered arm. And so we stumble off hastil
y. The graveyard is a mass of wreckage. Coffins an
d corpses lie strewn about. They have been killed 
once again; but each of them that was flung up sav
ed one of us. The hedge is destroyed, the rails of
 the light railway are torn up and rise stiffly in
 the air in great arches. Someone lies in front of
 us. We stop; Kropp goes on alone with the wounded
 man. The man on the ground is a recruit. His hip 
is covered with blood; he is so exhausted that I f
eel for my water-bottle where I have rum and tea. 
Kat restrains my hand and stoops over him. "Where'
s it got you, comrade?" His eyes move. He is too w
eak to answer. We cut off his trousers carefully. 
He groans. "Gently, gently, it is much better----"
 If he has been hit in the stomach he oughtn't to 
drink anything. There's no vomiting, that's a good
 sign. We lay the hip bare. It is one mass of minc
emeat and bone splinters. The joint has been hit. 
This lad won't walk any more. I wet his temples wi
th a moistened finger and give him a swig. His eye
s move again. We see now that the right arm is ble
eding as well. Kat spreads out two wads of dressin
g as wide as possible so that they will cover the 
wound. I look for something to bind loosely round 
it. We have nothing more, so I slit up the wounded
 man's trouser leg still farther in order to use a
 piece of his underpants as a bandage. But he is w
earing none. I now look at him closely. He is the 
fair-headed boy of a little while ago. In the mean
time Kat has taken a bandage from a dead man's poc
ket and we carefully bind the wound. I say to the 
youngster who looks at us fixedly: "We're going fo
r a stretcher now----" Then he opens his mouth and
 whispers: "Stay here----" "We'll be back again so
on," says Kat. "We are only going to get a stretch
er for you." We don't know if he understands. He w
himpers like a child and plucks at us: "Don't go a
way----" Kat looks around and whispers: "Shouldn't
 we just take a revolver and put an end to it?" Th
e youngster will hardly survive the carrying, and 
at the most he will only last a few days. What he 
has gone through so far is nothing to what he's in
 for till he dies. Now he is numb and feels nothin
g. In an hour he will become one screaming bundle 
of intolerable pain. Every day that he can live wi
ll be a howling torture. And to whom does it matte
r whether he has them or not---- I nod. "Yes, Kat,
 we ought to put him out of his misery." He stands
 still a moment. He has made up his mind. We look 
round--but we are no longer alone. A little group 
is gathering, from the shell-holes and trenches ap
pear heads. We get a stretcher. Kat shakes his hea
d. "Such a kid----" He repeats it: "Young innocent
s----" * * Our losses are less than was to be expe
cted--five killed and eight wounded. It was in fac
t quite a short bombardment. Two of our dead lie i
n the upturned graves. We had merely to throw the 
earth in on them. We go back. We trot off silently
 in single file one behind the other. The wounded 
are taken to the dressing-station. The morning is 
cloudy. The bearers make a fuss about numbers and 
tickets, the wounded whimper. It begins to rain. A
n hour later we reach our lorries and climb in. Th
ere is more room now than there was. The rain beco
mes heavier. We take out waterproof sheets and spr
ead them over our heads. The rain rattles down, an
d flows off at the sides in streams. The lorries b
ump through the holes, and we rock to and fro in a
 half-sleep. Two men in the front of the lorry hav
e long forked poles. They watch for telephone wire
s which hang crosswise over the road so densely th
at they might easily pull our heads off. The two f
ellows take them at the right moment on their pole
s and lift them over behind us. We hear their call
 "Mind--wire--," dip the knee in a half-sleep and 
straighten up again. Monotonously the lorries sway
, monotonously come the calls, monotonously falls 
the rain. It falls on our heads and on the heads o
f the dead up in the line, on the body of the litt
le recruit with the wound that is so much too big 
for his hip; it falls on Kemmerich's grave; it fal
ls in our hearts. An explosion sounds somewhere. W
e wince, our eyes become tense, our hands are read
y to vault over the side of the lorry into the dit
ch by the road. It goes no farther--only the monot
onous cry: "Mind--wire,"--our knees bend--we are a
gain half asleep. CHAPTER V Killing each separate 
louse is a tedious business when a man has hundred
s. The little beasts are hard and the everlasting 
cracking with one's fingernails very soon becomes 
wearisome. So Tjaden has rigged up the lid of a bo
ot-polish tin with a piece of wire over the lighte
d stump of a candle. The lice are simply thrown in
to this little pan. Crack! and they're done for. W
e sit around with our shirts on our knees, our bod
ies naked to the warm air and our hands at work. H
aie has a particularly fine brand of louse: they h
ave a red cross on their heads. He suggests that h
e brought them back with him from the hospital at 
Thourhout, where they attended personally on a sur
geon-general. He says he means to use the fat that
 slowly accumulates in the tin-lid for polishing h
is boots, and roars with laughter for half an hour
 at his own joke. But he hasn't much success to-da
y; we are too preoccupied with another affair. The
 rumour has materialized. Himmelstoss has come. He
 appeared yesterday; we've already heard the well-
known voice. He seems to have overdone it with a c
ouple of young recruits on the ploughed field at h
ome, and unknown to him the son of the local magis
trate was watching. That cooked his goose. He will
 meet some surprises here. Tjaden has been meditat
ing for hours what to say to him. Haie gazes thoug
htfully at his great paws and winks at me. The thr
ashing was the high water mark of his life. He tel
ls me he often dreams of it. Kropp and Müller are 
amusing themselves. From somewhere or other, proba
bly the pioneer-cook-house, Kropp has bagged for h
imself a mess-tin full of beans. Müller squints hu
ngrily into it but checks himself and says: "Alber
t, what would you do if it were suddenly peace-tim
e again?" "There won't be any civil life," says Al
bert bluntly. "Well, but if--" persists Müller, "w
hat would you do?" "Clear out of this!" growls Kro
pp. "Of course. And then what?" "Get drunk," says 
Albert. "Don't talk rot, I mean seriously----" "So
 do I," says Kropp, "what else should a man do?" K
at becomes interested. He levies tribute on Kropp'
s tin of beans, swallows some, then considers for 
a while and says: "You might get drunk first, of c
ourse, but then you'd take the next train for home
 and mother. Peace-time, man, Albert----" He fumbl
es in his oil-cloth pocket-book for a photograph a
nd suddenly shows it all round. "My old people!" T
hen he puts it back and swears: "Damned lousy war-
---" "It's all very well for you to talk," I tell 
him. "You've a wife and children." "True," he nods
, "and I have to see to it that they've something 
to eat." We laugh. "They won't lack for that, Kat,
 you'd scrounge it from somewhere." Müller is insa
tiable and gives himself no peace. He wakes Haie W
esthus out of his dream. "Haie, what would you do 
if it was peace time?" "Give you a kick in the bac
kside for the way you talk," I say. "How does it c
ome about exactly?" "How does the cow-shit come on
 the roof?" retorts Müller laconically, and turns 
to Haie Westhus again. It is too much for Haie. He
 shakes his freckled head: "You mean when the war'
s over?" "Exactly. You've said it." "Well, there'd
 be women of course, eh?"--Haie licks his lips. "S
ure." "By Jove yes," says Haie, his face melting, 
"then I'd grab some good buxom dame, some real kit
chen wench with plenty to get hold of, you know, a
nd jump straight into bed. Just you think, boys, a
 real feather-bed with a spring mattress; I wouldn
't put trousers on again for a week." Everyone is 
silent. The picture is too good. Our flesh creeps.
 At last Müller pulls himself together and says: "
And then what?" A pause. Then Haie explains rather
 awkwardly: "If I were a non-com. I'd stay with th
e Prussians and serve out my time." "Haie, you've 
got a screw loose, surely!" I say. "Have you ever 
dug peat?" he retorts good-naturedly. "You try it.
" Then he pulls a spoon out of the top of his boot
 and reaches over into Kropp's mess-tin. "It can't
 be worse than digging trenches," I venture. Haie 
chews and grins: "It lasts longer though. And ther
e's no getting out of it either." "But, man, surel
y it's better at home." "Some ways," says he, and 
with open mouth sinks into a day-dream. You can se
e what he is thinking. There is the mean little hu
t on the moors, the hard work on the heath from mo
rning till night in the heat, the miserable pay, t
he dirty labourer's clothes. "In the army in peace
 time you've nothing to trouble about," he goes on
, "your food's found every day, or else you kick u
p a row; you've a bed, every week clean under-wear
 like a perfect gent, you do your non-com.'s duty,
 you have a good suit of clothes; in the evening y
ou're a free man and go off to the pub." Haie is e
xtraordinarily set on his idea. He's in love with 
it. "And when your twelve years are up you get you
r pension and become a village bobby, and you can 
walk about the whole day." He's already sweating o
n it. "And just you think how you'd be treated. He
re a dram, there a pint. Everybody wants to be wel
l in with a bobby." "You'll never be a non-com. th
ough, Haie," interrupts Kat. Haie looks at him sad
ly and is silent. His thoughts still linger over t
he clear evenings in autumn, the Sundays in the he
ather, the village bells, the afternoons and eveni
ngs with the servant girls, the fried bacon and ba
rley, the care-free evening hours in the ale-house
---- He can't part with all these dreams so abrupt
ly; he merely growls: "What silly questions you do
 ask." He pulls his shirt over his head and button
s up his tunic. "What would you do, Tjaden?" asks 
Kropp. Tjaden thinks only of one thing. "See to it
 that Himmelstoss doesn't get past me." Apparently
 he would like most to have him in a cage and sail
 into him with a club every morning. To Kropp he s
ays warmly: "If I were in your place I'd see to it
 that I became a lieutenant. Then you could grind 
him till the water in his backside boils." "And yo
u, Detering?" asks Müller like an inquisitor. He's
 a born schoolmaster with all his questions. Deter
ing is sparing with his words. But on this subject
 he speaks. He looks at the sky and says only the 
one sentence: "I would go straight on with the har
vesting." Then he gets up and walks off. He is wor
ried. His wife has to look after the farm. They've
 already taken away two of his horses. Every day h
e reads the papers that come, to see whether it is
 raining in his little corner of Oldenburg. They h
aven't brought the hay in yet. At this moment Himm
elstoss appears. He comes straight up to our group
. Tjaden's face turns red. He stretches his length
 on the grass and shuts his eyes in embarrassment.
 Himmelstoss is a little hesitant, his gait become
s slower. Then he marches up to us. No one makes a
ny motion to stand up. Kropp looks up at him with 
interest. He continues to stand in front of us and
 wait. As no one says anything he launches a "Well
?" A couple of seconds go by. Apparently Himmelsto
ss doesn't quite know what to do. He would like mo
st to set us all on the run again. But he seems to
 have learned already that the front line isn't a 
parade ground. He tries it on though, and by addre
ssing himself to one instead of to all of us hopes
 to get some response. Kropp is nearest, so he fav
ours him. "Well, you here too?" But Albert's no fr
iend of his. "A bit longer than you, I fancy," he 
retorts. The red moustache twitches: "You don't re
cognize me any more, what?" Tjaden now opens his e
yes. "I do though." Himmelstoss turns to him: "Tja
den, isn't it?" Tjaden lifts his head. "And do you
 know what you are?" Himmelstoss is disconcerted. 
"Since when have we become so familiar? I don't re
member that we ever slept in the gutter together?"
 He has no idea what to make of the situation. He 
didn't expect this open hostility. But he is on hi
s guard: someone has already dinned some rot into 
him about getting a shot in the back. The question
 about the gutter makes Tjaden so mad that he beco
mes almost witty: "No, you slept there by yourself
." Himmelstoss begins to boil. But Tjaden gets in 
ahead of him. He must bring off his insult: "Would
n't you like to know what you are? A dirty hound, 
that's what you are. I've been wanting to tell you
 that for a long time." The satisfaction of months
 shines in his dull pig's eyes as he spits out: Di
rty hound! Himmelstoss lets fly too, now. "What's 
that, you muck-rake, you dirty peat-stealer? Stand
 up there, bring your heels together when your sup
erior officer speaks to you." Tjaden winks solemnl
y. "You take a run and jump at yourself, Himmelsto
ss." Himmelstoss is a raging book of army regulati
ons. The Kaiser couldn't be more insulted. "Tjaden
, I command you, as your superior officer: Stand u
p!" "Anything else you would like?" asks Tjaden. "
Will you obey my order or not?" Tjaden replies, wi
thout knowing it, in the well-known classical phra
se. At the same time he ventilates his backside. "
I'll have you court-martialled," storms Himmelstos
s. We watch him disappear in the direction of the 
Orderly Room. Haie and Tjaden burst into a regular
 peat-digger's bellow. Haie laughs so much that he
 dislocates his jaw, and suddenly stands there hel
pless with his mouth wide open. Albert has to put 
it back again by giving it a blow with his fist. K
at is troubled: "If he reports you, it'll be prett
y serious." "Do you think he will?" asks Tjaden. "
Sure to," I say. "The least you'll get will be fiv
e days close arrest," says Kat. That doesn't worry
 Tjaden. "Five days clink are five days rest." "An
d if they send you to the Fortress?" urges the tho
roughgoing Müller. "Well, for the time being the w
ar will be over so far as I am concerned." Tjaden 
is a cheerful soul. There aren't any worries for h
im. He goes off with Haie and Leer so that they wo
n't find him in the first flush of the excitement.
 * * Müller hasn't finished yet. He tackles Kropp 
again. "Albert, if you were really at home now, wh
at would you do?" Kropp is contented now and more 
accommodating: "How many of us were there in the c
lass exactly?" We count up: out of twenty, seven a
re dead, four wounded, one in a mad-house. That ma
kes twelve privates. "Three of them are lieutenant
s," says Müller. "Do you think they would still le
t Kantorek sit on them?" We guess not: we wouldn't
 let ourselves be sat on for that matter. "What do
 you mean by the three-fold theme in 'William Tell
'?" says Kropp reminiscently, and roars with laugh
ter. "What was the purpose of the Poetic League of
 Göttingen?" asks Müller suddenly and earnestly. "
How many children had Charles the Bald?" I interru
pt gently. "You'll never make anything of your lif
e, Bäumer," croaks Müller. "When was the Battle of
 Zana?" Kropp wants to know. "You lack the studiou
s mind, Kropp, sit down, three minus----" I wink. 
"What offices did Lycurgus consider the most impor
tant for the state?" asks Müller, pretending to ta
ke off his pince-nez. "Does it go: 'We Germans fea
r God and none else in the whole world,' or 'We, t
he Germans, fear God and----'" I submit. "How many
 inhabitants has Melbourne?" asks Müller. "How do 
you expect to succeed in life if you don't know th
at?" I ask Albert hotly. Which he caps with: "What
 is meant by Cohesion?" We remember mighty little 
of all that rubbish. Anyway, it has never been the
 slightest use to us. At school nobody ever taught
 us how to light a cigarette in a storm of rain, n
or how a fire could be made with wet wood--nor tha
t it is best to stick a bayonet in the belly becau
se there it doesn't get jammed, as it does in the 
ribs. Müller says thoughtfully: "What's the use. W
e'll have to go back and sit on the forms again." 
I consider that out of the question. "We might tak
e a special exam." "That needs preparation. And if
 you do get through, what then? A student's life i
sn't any better. If you have no money, you have to
 work like the devil." "It's a bit better. But it'
s rot all the same, everything they teach you." Kr
opp supports me: "How can a man take all that stuf
f seriously when he's once been out here?" "Still 
you must have an occupation of some sort," insists
 Müller, as though he were Kantorek himself. Alber
t cleans his nails with a knife. We are surprised 
at this delicacy. But it is merely pensiveness. He
 puts the knife away and continues: "That's just i
t. Kat and Detering and Haie will go back to their
 jobs because they had them already. Himmelstoss t
oo. But we never had any. How will we ever get use
d to one after this, here?"--he makes a gesture to
ward the front. "We'll want a private income, and 
then we'll be able to live by ourselves in a wood,
" I say, but at once feel ashamed of this absurd i
dea. "But what will really happen when we go back?
" wonders Müller, and even he is troubled. Kropp g
ives a shrug. "I don't know. Let's get back first,
 then we'll find out." We are all utterly at a los
s. "What could we do?" I ask. "I don't want to do 
anything," replies Kropp wearily. "You'll be dead 
one day, so what does it matter? I don't think we'
ll ever go back." "When I think about it, Albert,"
 I say after a while, rolling over on my back, "wh
en I hear the word 'peace time,' it goes to my hea
d; and if it really came, I think I would do some 
unimaginable thing--something, you know, that it's
 worth having lain here in the muck for. But I can
't even imagine anything. All I do know is that th
is business about professions and studies and sala
ries and so on--it makes me sick, it is and always
 was disgusting. I don't see anything--I don't see
 anything at all, Albert." All at once everything 
seems to me confused and hopeless. Kropp feels it 
too. "It will go pretty hard with us all. But nobo
dy at home seems to worry much about it. Two years
 of shells and bombs--a man won't peel that off as
 easy as a sock." We agree that it's the same for 
everyone; not only for us here, but everywhere, fo
r everyone who is of our age; to some more, and to
 others less. It is the common fate of our generat
ion. Albert expresses it: "The war has ruined us f
or everything." He is right. We are not youth any 
longer. We don't want to take the world by storm. 
We are fleeing. We fly from ourselves. From our li
fe. We were eighteen and had begun to love life an
d the world; and we had to shoot it to pieces. The
 first bomb, the first explosion, burst in our hea
rts. We are cut off from activity, from striving, 
from progress. We believe in such things no longer
, we believe in the war. * * The Orderly Room show
s signs of life. Himmelstoss seems to have stirred
 them up. At the head of the column trots the fat 
sergeant-major. It is queer that almost all pay-se
rgeant-majors are fat. Himmelstoss follows him, th
irsting for vengeance. His boots gleam in the sun.
 We get up. "Where's Tjaden?" the sergeant puffs. 
No one knows, of course. Himmelstoss glowers at us
 wrathfully. "You know very well. You won't say, t
hat's the fact of the matter. Out with it!" Fatty 
looks round enquiringly; but Tjaden is not to be s
een. He tries another way. "Tjaden will report at 
the Orderly Room in ten minutes." Then he steams o
ff with Himmelstoss in his wake. "I have a feeling
 that next time we go up wiring I'll be letting a 
bundle of wire fall on Himmelstoss's leg," hints K
ropp. "We'll have quite a lot of jokes with him," 
laughs Müller.-- That is our sole ambition: to kno
ck the conceit out of a postman.-- I go into the h
ut and put Tjaden wise. He disappears. Then we cha
nge our possy and lie down again to play cards. We
 know how to do that: to play cards, to swear, and
 to fight. Not much for twenty years;--and yet too
 much for twenty years. Half an hour later Himmels
toss is back again. Nobody pays any attention to h
im. He asks for Tjaden. We shrug our shoulders. "T
hen you'd better find him," he persists. "Haven't 
you been to look for him?" Kropp lies back in the 
grass and says: "Have you ever been out here befor
e?" "That's none of your business," retorts Himmel
stoss. "I expect an answer." "Very good," says Kro
pp, getting up. "See up there where those little w
hite clouds are. Those are anti-aircraft. We were 
over there yesterday. Five dead and eight wounded.
 It was a lot of fun. Next time, when you go up wi
th us, before they die the fellows will come up to
 you, click their heels, and ask stiffly: 'Please 
may I go? Please may I hop it? We've been waiting 
here a long time for someone like you.'" He sits d
own again and Himmelstoss disappears like a comet.
 "Three days C.B.," Kat conjectures. "Next time I'
ll let fly," I say to Albert. But that is the end.
 The case comes up for trial in the evening. In th
e Orderly Room sits our Lieutenant, Bertink, and c
alls us in one after another. I have to appear as 
a witness and explain the reason of Tjaden's insub
ordination. The story of the bed-wetting makes an 
impression. Himmelstoss is recalled and I repeat m
y statement. "Is that right?" Bertink asks Himmels
toss. He tries to evade the question, but in the e
nd has to confess, for Kropp tells the same story.
 "Why didn't someone report the matter, then?" ask
s Bertink. We are silent: he must know himself how
 much use it is reporting such things in the army.
 It isn't usual to make complaints in the army. He
 understands it all right though, and lectures Him
melstoss, making it plain to him that the front is
n't a parade-ground. Then comes Tjaden's turn, who
 gets a long sermon and three days open arrest. He
 gives Kropp a wink and one day's open arrest. "It
 can't be helped," he says to him regretfully. He 
is a decent fellow. Open arrest is quite pleasant.
 The clink was once a fowl-house; there we can vis
it the prisoners, we know how to manage it. Close 
arrest would have meant the cellar. They used to t
ie us to a tree, but that is forbidden now. In man
y ways we are treated quite like men. An hour afte
r Tjaden and Kropp are settled in behind their wir
e-netting we make our way in to them. Tjaden greet
s us crowing. Then we play skat far into the night
. Tjaden wins of course, the lucky wretch. * * Whe
n we break up Kat says to me: "What do you say to 
some roast goose?" "Not bad," I agree. We climb up
 on a munition-waggon. The ride costs us two cigar
ettes. Kat has marked the spot exactly. The shed b
elongs to a regimental headquarters. I agree to ge
t the goose and receive my instructions. The out-h
ouse is behind the wall and the door shuts with ju
st a peg. Kat hoists me up. I rest my foot in his 
hands and climb over the wall. Kat keeps watch bel
ow. I wait a few moments to accustom my eyes to th
e darkness. Then I recognize the shed. Softly I st
eal across, lift the peg, pull it out and open the
 door. I distinguish two white patches. Two geese,
 that's bad: if I grab one the other will cackle. 
Well, both of them--if I'm quick, it can be done. 
I make a jump. I catch hold of one and the next in
stant the second. Like a madman I bash their heads
 against the wall to stun them. But I haven't quit
e enough weight. The beasts cackle and strike out 
with their feet and wings. I fight desperately, bu
t Lord! what a kick a goose has! They struggle and
 I stagger about. In the dark these white patches 
are terrifying. My arms have grown wings and I'm a
lmost afraid of going up into the sky, as though I
 held a couple of captive balloons in my fists. Th
en the row begins; one of them gets his breath and
 goes off like an alarm clock. Before I can do any
thing, something comes in from outside; I feel a b
low, lie outstretched on the floor, and hear awful
 growls. A dog. I steal a glance to the side, he m
akes a snap at my throat. I lie still and tuck my 
chin into my collar. It's a bull dog. After an ete
rnity he withdraws his head and sits down beside m
e. But if I make the least movement he growls. I c
onsider. The only thing to do is to get hold of my
 small revolver, and that too before anyone arrive
s. Inch by inch I move my hand toward it. I have t
he feeling that it lasts an hour. The slightest mo
vement and then an awful growl; I lie still, then 
try again. When at last I have the revolver my han
d starts to tremble. I press it against the ground
 and then say over to myself: Jerk the revolver up
, fire before he has a chance to grab, and then ju
mp up. Slowly I take a deep breath and become calm
er. Then I hold my breath, whip up the revolver, i
t cracks, the dog leaps howling to one side, I mak
e for the door of the shed and fall head over heel
s over one of the damned geese. At full speed I se
ize it again, and with a swing toss it over the wa
ll and clamber up. No sooner am I on top than the 
dog is up again as lively as ever and springs at m
e. Quickly I let myself drop. Ten paces away stand
s Kat with the goose under his arm. As soon as he 
sees me we run. At last we can take a breather. Th
e goose is dead, Kat saw to that in a moment. We i
ntend to roast it, without telling anybody. I fetc
h a stove and wood from the hut and we crawl into 
a small deserted lean-to which we use for such pur
poses. The single window space is heavily curtaine
d. There is a sort of hearth, an iron plate set on
 some bricks. We kindle a fire. Kat plucks and cle
ans the goose. We put the feathers carefully to on
e side. We intend to make two cushions out of them
 with the inscription: "Sleep soft under shell fir
e." The sound of the gun-fire from the front penet
rates into our refuge. The glow of the fire lights
 up our faces, shadows dance on the wall. Sometime
s a heavy crash and the hut shivers. Aeroplane bom
bs. Once we hear a stifled cry. A hut must have be
en hit. Aeroplanes drone; the tack-tack of machine
 guns breaks out. But no light that could be obser
ved shows from us. We sit opposite one another, Ka
t and I, two soldiers in shabby coats, cooking a g
oose in the middle of the night. We don't talk muc
h, but I believe we have a more complete communion
 with one another than even lovers have. We are tw
o men, two minute sparks of life; outside is the n
ight and the circle of death. We sit on the edge o
f it crouching in danger, the grease drips from ou
r hands, in our hearts we are close to one another
, and the hour is like the room: flecked over with
 the lights and shadows of our feelings cast by a 
quiet fire. What does he know of me or I of him? f
ormerly we should not have had a single thought in
 common--now we sit with a goose between us and fe
el in unison, and are so intimate that we do not e
ven speak. It takes a long time to roast a goose, 
even when it is young and fat. So we take turns. O
ne bastes it while the other lies down and sleeps.
 A grand smell gradually fills the hut. The noises
 without increase in volume, pass into my dream an
d yet linger in my memory. In a half sleep I watch
 Kat dip and raise the ladle. I love him, his shou
lders, his angular, stooping figure--and at the sa
me time I see behind him woods and stars, and a cl
ear voice utters words that bring me peace, to me,
 a soldier in big boots, belt, and knapsack, takin
g the road that lies before him under the high hea
ven, quickly forgetting and seldom sorrowful, for 
ever pressing on under the wide night sky. A littl
e soldier and a clear voice, and if anyone were to
 caress him he would hardly understand, this soldi
er with the big boots and shut heart, who marches 
because he is wearing big boots, and has forgotten
 all else but marching. Beyond the sky-line is a c
ountry with flowers, lying so still that he would 
like to weep. There are sights there that he has n
ot forgotten, because he never possessed them--per
plexing, yet lost to him. Are not his twenty summe
rs there? Is my face wet, and where am I? Kat stan
ds before me, his gigantic, stooping shadow falls 
upon me like home. He speaks gently, he smiles and
 goes back to the fire. Then he says: "It's done."
 "Yes, Kat." I stir myself. In the middle of the r
oom shines the brown goose. We take out our collap
sible forks and our pocket-knives and each cuts of
f a leg. With it we have army bread dipped in grav
y. We eat slowly and with gusto. "How does it tast
e, Kat?" "Good! And yours?" "Good, Kat." We are br
others and press on one another the choicest piece
s. Afterwards I smoke a cigarette and Kat a cigar.
 There is still a lot left. "How would it be, Kat,
 if we took a bit to Kropp and Tjaden?" "Sure," sa
ys he. We carve off a portion and wrap it up caref
ully in newspaper. The rest we thought of taking o
ver to the hut. Kat laughs, and simply says: "Tjad
en." I agree, we will have to take it all. So we g
o off to the fowl-house to wake them. But first we
 pack away the feathers. Kropp and Tjaden take us 
for magicians. Then they get busy with their teeth
. Tjaden holds a wing in his mouth with both hands
 like a mouth-organ, and gnaws. He drinks the grav
y from the pot and smacks his lips: "May I never f
orget you!" We go to our hut. Again there is the l
ofty sky with the stars and the oncoming dawn, and
 I pass on beneath it, a soldier with big boots an
d a full belly, a little soldier in the early morn
ing--but by my side, stooping and angular, goes Ka
t, my comrade. The outlines of the huts are upon u
s in the dawn like a dark, deep sleep. CHAPTER VI 
There are rumours of an offensive. We go up to the
 front two days earlier than usual. On the way we 
pass a shelled school-house. Stacked up against it
s longer side is a high double wall of yellow, unp
olished, brand-new coffins. They still smell of fi
r, and pine, and the forest. There are at least a 
hundred. "That's a good preparation for the offens
ive," says Müller astonished. "They're for us," gr
owls Detering. "Don't talk rot," says Kat to him a
ngrily. "You be thankful if you get so much as a c
offin," grins Tjaden, "they'll slip you a water-pr
oof sheet for your old Aunt Sally of a carcase." T
he others jest too, unpleasant jests, but what els
e can a man do?--The coffins are really for us. Th
e organization surpasses itself in that kind of th
ing. Ahead of us everything is simmering. The firs
t night we try to get our bearings. When it is fai
rly quiet we can hear the transports behind the en
emy lines rolling ceaselessly until dawn. Kat says
 they do not go back but are bringing up troops--t
roops, munitions, and shells. The English artiller
y has been strengthened, that we can detect at onc
e. There are at least four more batteries of twent
y-fives to the right of the farm, and behind the p
oplars they have put in trench-mortars. Besides th
ese they have brought up a number of those little 
French beasts with instantaneous fuses. We are in 
low spirits. After we have been in the dug-outs tw
o hours our own shells begin to fall in the trench
. This is the third time in four weeks. If it were
 simply a mistake in aim no one would say anything
, but the truth is that the barrels are worn out. 
The shots are often so uncertain that they land wi
thin our own lines. To-night two of our men were w
ounded by them. * * The front is a cage in which w
e must await fearfully whatever may happen. We lie
 under the network of arching shells and live in a
 suspense of uncertainty. Over us Chance hovers. I
f a shot comes, we can duck, that is all; we neith
er know nor can determine where it will fall. It i
s this Chance that makes us indifferent. A few mon
ths ago I was sitting in a dug-out playing skat; a
fter a while I stood up and went to visit some fri
ends in another dug-out. On my return nothing more
 was to be seen of the first one, it had been blow
n to pieces by a direct hit. I went back to the se
cond and arrived just in time to lend a hand diggi
ng it out. In the interval it had been buried. It 
is just as much a matter of chance that I am still
 alive as that I might have been hit. In a bomb-pr
oof dug-out I may be smashed to atoms and in the o
pen may survive ten hours' bombardment unscathed. 
No soldier outlives a thousand chances. But every 
soldier believes in Chance and trusts his luck. * 
* We must look out for our bread. The rats have be
come much more numerous lately because the trenche
s are no longer in good condition. Detering says i
t is a sure sign of a coming bombardment. The rats
 here are particularly repulsive, they are so fat-
-the kind we call corpse-rats. They have shocking,
 evil, naked faces, and it is nauseating to see th
eir long, nude tails. They seem to be mighty hungr
y. Almost every man has had his bread gnawed. Krop
p wrapped his in his waterproof sheet and put it u
nder his head, but he cannot sleep because they ru
n over his face to get at it. Detering meant to ou
twit them: he fastened a thin wire to the roof and
 suspended his bread from it. During the night whe
n he switched on his pocket-torch he saw the wire 
swinging to and fro. On the bread was riding a fat
 rat. At last we put a stop to it. We cannot affor
d to throw the bread away, because already we have
 practically nothing left to eat in the morning, s
o we carefully cut off the bits of bread that the 
animals have gnawed. The slices we cut off are hea
ped together in the middle of the floor. Each man 
takes out his spade and lies down prepared to stri
ke. Detering, Kropp, and Kat hold their pocket-lam
ps ready. After a few minutes we hear the first sh
uffling and tugging. It grows, now it is the sound
 of many little feet. Then the torches switch on a
nd every man strikes at the heap, which scatters w
ith a rush. The result is good. We toss the bits o
f rat over the parapet and again lie in wait. Seve
ral times we repeat the process. At last the beast
s get wise to it, or perhaps they have scented the
 blood. They return no more. Nevertheless, before 
morning the remainder of the bread on the floor ha
s been carried off. In the adjoining sector they a
ttacked two large cats and a dog, bit them to deat
h and devoured them. Next day there is an issue of
 Edamer cheese. Each man gets almost a quarter of 
a cheese. In one way that is all to the good, for 
Edamer is tasty--but in another way it is vile, be
cause the fat red balls have long been a sign of a
 bad time coming. Our forebodings increase as rum 
is served out. We drink it of course; but are not 
greatly comforted. For days we loaf about and make
 war on the rats. Ammunition and hand-grenades bec
ome more plentiful. We even overhaul the bayonets-
-that is to say, the ones that have a saw on the b
lunt edge. If the fellows over there catch a man w
ith one of those he's killed at sight. In the next
 sector some of our men were found whose noses wer
e cut off and their eyes poked out with their own 
saw-bayonets. Their mouths and noses were stuffed 
with sawdust so that they suffocated. Some of the 
recruits have bayonets of this kind; we take them 
away and give them the ordinary kind. But the bayo
net has practically lost its importance. It is usu
ally the fashion now to charge with bombs and spad
es only. The sharpened spade is a more handy and m
any-sided weapon; not only can it be used for jabb
ing a man under the chin, but it is much better fo
r striking with because of its greater weight, and
 if one hits between the neck and shoulder it easi
ly cleaves as far down as the chest. The bayonet f
requently jams on the thrust and then a man has to
 kick hard on the other fellow's belly to pull it 
out again; and in the interval he may easily get o
ne himself. And what's more the blade often gets b
roken off. At night they send over gas. We expect 
the attack to follow and lie with our masks on, re
ady to tear them off as soon as the first shadow a
ppears. Dawn approaches without anything happening
--only the everlasting, nerve-wracking roll behind
 the enemy lines, trains, trains, lorries, lorries
; but what are they concentrating? Our artillery f
ires on it continually, but still it does not ceas
e. We have tired faces and avoid each other's eyes
. "It will be like the Somme," says Kat gloomily. 
"There we were shelled steadily for seven days and
 nights." Kat has lost all his fun since we have b
een here, which is bad, for Kat is an old front-ho
g, and can smell what is coming. Only Tjaden seems
 pleased with the good rations and the rum; he thi
nks we might even go back to rest without anything
 happening at all. It almost looks like it. Day af
ter day passes. At night I squat in the listening-
post. Above me the rockets and parachute-lights sh
oot up and float down again. I am cautious and ten
se, my heart thumps. My eyes turn again and again 
to the luminous dial of my watch; the hands will n
ot budge. Sleep hangs on my eyelids, I work my toe
s in my boots in order to keep awake. Nothing happ
ens till I am relieved;--only the everlasting roll
ing over there. Gradually we grow calmer and play 
skat and poker continually. Perhaps we will be luc
ky. All day the sky is hung with observation ballo
ons. There is a rumour that the enemy are going to
 put tanks over and use low-flying planes for the 
attack. But that interests us less than what we he
ar of the new flame-throwers. * * We wake up in th
e middle of the night. The earth booms. Heavy fire
 is falling on us. We crouch into corners. We dist
inguish shells of every calibre. Each man lays hol
d of his things and looks again every minute to re
assure himself that they are still there. The dug-
out heaves, the night roars and flashes. We look a
t each other in the momentary flashes of light, an
d with pale faces and pressed lips shake our heads
. Every man is aware of the heavy shells tearing d
own the parapet, rooting up the embankment and dem
olishing the upper layers of concrete. When a shel
l lands in the trench we note how the hollow, furi
ous blast is like a blow from the paw of a raging 
beast of prey. Already by morning a few of the rec
ruits are green and vomiting. They are too inexper
ienced. Slowly the grey light trickles into the po
st and pales the flashes of the shells. Morning is
 come. The explosion of mines mingles with the gun
-fire. That is the most dementing convulsion of al
l. The whole region where they go up becomes one g
rave. The reliefs go out, the observers stagger in
, covered with dirt, and trembling. One lies down 
in silence in the corner and eats, the other, a re
servist-reinforcement, sobs; twice he has been flu
ng over the parapet by the blast of the explosions
 without getting any more than shell-shock. The re
cruits are eyeing him. We must watch them, these t
hings are catching, already some lips begin to qui
ver. It is good that it is growing daylight; perha
ps the attack will come before noon. The bombardme
nt does not diminish. It is falling in the rear to
o. As far as one can see it spouts fountains of mu
d and iron. A wide belt is being raked. The attack
 does not come, but the bombardment continues. Slo
wly we become mute. Hardly a man speaks. We cannot
 make ourselves understood. Our trench is almost g
one. At many places it is only eighteen inches hig
h, it is broken by holes, and craters, and mountai
ns of earth. A shell lands square in front of our 
post. At once it is dark. We are buried and must d
ig ourselves out. After an hour the entrance is cl
ear again, and we are calmer because we have had s
omething to do. Our company commander scrambles in
 and reports that two dug-outs are gone. The recru
its calm themselves when they see him. He says tha
t an attempt will be made to bring up food this ev
ening. That sounds reassuring. No one had thought 
of it except Tjaden. Now the outside world seems t
o draw a little nearer: if food can be brought up,
 think the recruits, then it can't really be so ba
d. We do not disabuse them; we know that food is a
s important as ammunition and only for that reason
 must be brought up. But it miscarries. A second p
arty goes out, and it also turns back. Finally Kat
 tries, and even he reappears without accomplishin
g anything. No one gets through, not even a fly is
 small enough to get through such a barrage. We pu
ll in our belts tighter and chew every mouthful th
ree times as long. Still the food does not last ou
t; we are damnably hungry. I take out a scrap of b
read, eat the white and put the crust back in my k
napsack; from time to time I nibble at it. * * The
 night is unbearable. We cannot sleep, but stare a
head of us and doze. Tjaden regrets that we wasted
 the gnawed pieces of bread on the rats. We would 
gladly have them again to eat now. We are short of
 water, too, but not seriously yet. Towards mornin
g, while it is still dark, there is some excitemen
t. Through the entrance rushes in a swarm of fleei
ng rats that try to storm the walls. Torches light
 up the confusion. Everyone yells and curses and s
laughters. The madness and despair of many hours u
nloads itself in this outburst. Faces are distorte
d, arms strike out, the beasts scream; we just sto
p in time to avoid attacking one another. The onsl
aught has exhausted us. We lie down to wait again.
 It is a marvel that our post has had no casualtie
s so far. It is one of the few deep dug-outs. A co
rporal creeps in; he has a loaf of bread with him.
 Three people have had the luck to get through dur
ing the night and bring some provisions. They say 
the bombardment extends undiminished as far as the
 artillery lines. It is a mystery where the enemy 
gets all his shells. We wait and wait. By midday w
hat I expected happens. One of the recruits has a 
fit. I have been watching him for a long time, gri
nding his teeth and opening and shutting his fists
. These hunted, protruding eyes, we know them too 
well. During the last few hours he has had merely 
the appearance of calm. He had collapsed like a ro
tten tree. Now he stands up, stealthily creeps acr
oss the floor, hesitates a moment and then glides 
towards the door. I intercept him and say: "Where 
are you going?" "I'll be back in a minute," says h
e, and tries to push past me. "Wait a bit, the she
lling will stop soon." He listens and for a moment
 his eye becomes clear. Then again he has the glow
ering eyes of a mad dog, he is silent, he shoves m
e aside. "One minute, lad," I say. Kat notices. Ju
st as the recruit shakes me off Kat jumps in and w
e hold him. Then he begins to rave: "Leave me alon
e, let me go out, I will go out!" He won't listen 
to anything and hits out, his mouth is wet and pou
rs out words, half choked, meaningless words. It i
s a case of claustrophobia, he feels as though he 
is suffocating here and wants to get out at any pr
ice. If we let him go he would run about everywher
e regardless of cover. He is not the first. Though
 he raves and his eyes roll, it can't be helped, w
e have to give him a hiding to bring him to his se
nses. We do it quickly and mercilessly, and at las
t he sits down quietly. The others have turned pal
e; let's hope it deters them. This bombardment is 
too much for the poor devils, they have been sent 
straight from a recruiting-depot into a barrage th
at is enough to turn an old soldier's hair grey. A
fter this affair the sticky, close atmosphere work
s more than ever on our nerves. We sit as if in ou
r graves waiting only to be closed in. Suddenly it
 howls and flashes terrifically, the dug-out crack
s in all its joints under a direct hit, fortunatel
y only a light one that the concrete blocks are ab
le to withstand. It rings metallically, the walls 
reel, rifles, helmets, earth, mud, and dust fly ev
erywhere. Sulphur fumes pour in. If we were in one
 of those light dug-outs that they have been build
ing lately instead of this deep one, not one of us
 would now be alive. But the effect is bad enough 
even so. The recruit starts to rave again and two 
others follow suit. One jumps up and rushes out, w
e have trouble with the other two. I start after t
he one who escapes and wonder whether to shoot him
 in the leg--then it shrieks again, I fling myself
 down and when I stand up the wall of the trench i
s plastered with smoking splinters, lumps of flesh
, and bits of uniform. I scramble back. The first 
recruit seems actually to have gone insane. He but
ts his head against the wall like a goat. We must 
try to-night to take him to the rear. Meanwhile we
 bind him, but in such a way that in case of attac
k he can be released at once. Kat suggests a game 
of skat: it is easier when a man has something to 
do. But it is no use, we listen for every explosio
n that comes close, miscount the tricks, and fail 
to follow suit. We have to give it up. We sit as t
hough in a hissing boiler that is being belaboured
 from without on all sides. Night again. We are de
adened by the strain--a deadly tension that scrape
s along one's spine like a gapped knife. Our legs 
refuse to move, our hands tremble, our bodies are 
a thin skin stretched painfully over repressed mad
ness, over an almost irresistible, bursting roar. 
We have neither flesh nor muscles any longer, we d
are not look at one another for fear of some incal
culable thing. So we shut our teeth--it will end--
it will end--perhaps we will come through. Suddenl
y the nearer explosions cease. The shelling contin
ues but it has lifted and falls behind us, our tre
nch is free. We seize the hand-grenades, pitch the
m out in front of the dug-out and jump after them.
 The bombardment has stopped and a heavy barrage n
ow falls behind us. The attack has come. No one wo
uld believe that in this howling waste there could
 still be men; but steel helmets now appear on all
 sides out of the trench, and fifty yards from us 
a machine-gun is already in position and barking. 
The wire-entanglements are torn to pieces. Yet the
y offer some obstacle. We see the storm-troops com
ing. Our artillery opens fire. Machine-guns rattle
, rifles crack. The charge works its way across. H
aie and Kropp begin with the hand-grenades. They t
hrow as fast as they can, others pass them, the ha
ndles with the strings already pulled. Haie throws
 seventy-five yards, Kropp sixty, it has been meas
ured, the distance is important. The enemy as they
 run cannot do much before they are within forty y
ards. We recognize the distorted faces, the smooth
 helmets: they are French. They have already suffe
red heavily when they reach the remnants of the ba
rbed wire entanglements. A whole line has gone dow
n before our machine-guns; then we have a lot of s
toppages and they come nearer. I see one of them, 
his face upturned, fall into a wire cradle. His bo
dy collapses, his hands remain suspended as though
 he were praying. Then his body drops clean away a
nd only his hands with the stumps of his arms, sho
t off, now hang in the wire. The moment we are abo
ut to retreat three faces rise up from the ground 
in front of us. Under one of the helmets a dark po
inted beard and two eyes that are fastened on me. 
I raise my hand, but I cannot throw into those str
ange eyes; for one mad moment the whole slaughter 
whirls like a circus round me, and these two eyes 
that are alone motionless; then the head rises up,
 a hand, a movement, and my hand-grenade flies thr
ough the air and into him. We make for the rear, p
ull wire cradles into the trench and leave bombs b
ehind us with the string pulled, which ensure us a
 fiery retreat. The machine-guns are already firin
g from the next position. We have become wild beas
ts. We do not fight, we defend ourselves against a
nnihilation. It is not against men that we fling o
ur bombs, what do we know of men in this moment wh
en Death with hands and helmets is hunting us down
--now, for the first time in three days we can see
 his face, now, for the first time in three days w
e can oppose him; we feel a mad anger. No longer d
o we lie helpless, waiting on the scaffold, we can
 destroy and kill, to save ourselves, to save ours
elves and be revenged. We crouch behind every corn
er, behind every barrier of barbed wire, and hurl 
heaps of explosives at the feet of the advancing e
nemy before we run. The blast of the hand-grenades
 impinges powerfully on our arms and legs; crouchi
ng like cats we run on, overwhelmed by this wave t
hat bears us along, that fills us with ferocity, t
urning us into thugs, into murderers, into God onl
y knows what devils; this wave that multiplies our
 strength with fear and madness and greed of life,
 seeking and fighting for nothing but our delivera
nce. If your own father came over with them you wo
uld not hesitate to fling a bomb into him. The for
ward trenches have been abandoned. Are they still 
trenches? They are blown to pieces, annihilated--t
here are only broken bits of trenches, holes linke
d by tracks; nests of craters, that is all. But th
e enemy's casualties increase. They did not count 
on so much resistance. * * It is nearly noon. The 
sun blazes hotly, the sweat stings in our eyes, we
 wipe it off on our sleeves and often blood with i
t. At last we reach a trench that is in a somewhat
 better condition. It is manned and ready for the 
counter-attack, it receives us. Our guns open up i
n full blast and cut off the enemy attack. The lin
es behind us stop. They can advance no farther. Th
e attack is crushed by our artillery. We watch. Th
e fire lifts a hundred yards and we break forward.
 Beside me a lance-corporal has his head torn off.
 He runs a few steps more while the blood spouts f
rom his neck like a fountain. It does not come qui
te to hand-to-hand fighting; they are driven back.
 We arrive once again at our shattered trench and 
pass on beyond it. Oh, this turning back again! We
 reach the shelter of the reserves and yearn to cr
eep in and disappear;--but instead we must turn ro
und and plunge again into the horror. If we were n
ot automata at that moment we would continue lying
 there, exhausted, and without will. But we are sw
ept forward again, powerless, madly savage and rag
ing; we will kill, for they are still our mortal e
nemies, their rifles and bombs are aimed against u
s, and if we don't destroy them, they will destroy
 us. The brown earth, the torn, blasted earth, wit
h a greasy shine under the sun's rays; the earth i
s the background of this restless, gloomy world of
 automatons, our gasping is the scratching of a qu
ill, our lips are dry, our heads are debauched wit
h stupor--thus we stagger forward, and into our pi
erced and shattered souls bores the torturing imag
e of the brown earth with the greasy sun and the c
onvulsed and dead soldiers, who lie there--it can'
t be helped--who cry and clutch at our legs as we 
spring away over them. We have lost all feeling fo
r one another. We can hardly control ourselves whe
n our hunted glance lights on the form of some oth
er man. We are insensible, dead men, who through s
ome trick, some dreadful magic, are still able to 
run and to kill. A young Frenchman lags behind, he
 is overtaken, he puts up his hands, in one he sti
ll holds his revolver--does he mean to shoot or to
 give himself up?--a blow from a spade cleaves thr
ough his face. A second sees it and tries to run f
arther; a bayonet jabs into his back. He leaps in 
the air, his arms thrown wide, his mouth wide open
, yelling; he staggers, in his back the bayonet qu
ivers. A third throws away his rifle, cowers down 
with his hands before his eyes. He is left behind 
with a few other prisoners to carry off the wounde
d. Suddenly in the pursuit we reach the enemy line
. We are so close on the heels of our retreating e
nemies that we reach it almost at the same time as
 they. In this way we suffer few casualties. A mac
hine-gun barks, but is silenced with a bomb. Never
theless, the couple of seconds has sufficed to giv
e us five stomach wounds. With the butt of his rif
le Kat smashes to pulp the face of one of the unwo
unded machine-gunners. We bayonet the others befor
e they have time to get out their bombs. Then thir
stily we drink the water they have for cooling the
 gun. Everywhere wire-cutters are snapping, planks
 are thrown across the entanglements, we jump thro
ugh the narrow entrances into the trenches. Haie s
trikes his spade into the neck of a gigantic Frenc
hman and throws the first hand-grenade; we duck be
hind a breastwork for a few seconds, then the whol
e section of trench before us is empty. The next t
hrow whizzes obliquely over the corner and clears 
a passage; as we run past we toss handfuls down in
to the dug-outs, the earth shudders, it crashes, d
ully and stifled, we stumble over slippery lumps o
f flesh, over yielding bodies; I fall into an open
 belly on which lies a clean, new officer's cap. T
he fight ceases. We lose touch with the enemy. We 
cannot stay here long but must retire under cover 
of our artillery to our own position. No sooner do
 we know this than we dive into the nearest dug-ou
ts, and with the utmost haste seize on whatever pr
ovisions we can see, especially the tins of corned
 beef and butter, before we clear out. We get back
 pretty well. There has been no further attack by 
the enemy. We lie for an hour panting and resting 
before anyone speaks. We are so completely played 
out that in spite of our great hunger we do not th
ink of the provisions. Then gradually we become so
mething like men again. The corned beef over there
 is famous along the whole front. Occasionally it 
has been the chief reason for a flying raid on our
 part, for our nourishment is generally very bad; 
we have a constant hunger. We bagged five tins alt
ogether. The fellows over there are well looked af
ter; it seems a luxury to us with our hunger-pangs
, our turnip jam, and meat so scarce that we simpl
y grab at it. Haie has scored a thin loaf of white
 French bread, and stuck it in behind his belt lik
e a spade. It is a bit bloody at one corner, but t
hat can be cut off. It is a good thing we have som
ething decent to eat at last; we still have a use 
for all our strength. Enough to eat is just as val
uable as a good dug-out; it can save our lives; th
at is the reason we are so greedy for it. Tjaden h
as captured two water-bottles full of cognac. We p
ass them round. * * The evening benediction begins
. Night comes, out of the craters rise the mists. 
It looks as though the holes were full of ghostly 
secrets. The white vapour creeps painfully round b
efore it ventures to steal away over the edge. The
n long streaks stretch from crater to crater. It i
s chilly. I am on sentry and stare into the darkne
ss. My strength is exhausted as always after an at
tack, and so it is hard for me to be alone with my
 thoughts. They are not properly thoughts; they ar
e memories which in my weakness turn homeward and 
strangely move me. The parachute-lights shoot upwa
rds--and I see a picture, a summer evening, I am i
n the cathedral cloister and look at the tall rose
 trees that bloom in the middle of the little cloi
ster garden where the monks lie buried. Around the
 walls are the stone carvings of the Stations of t
he Cross. No one is there. A great quietness rules
 in this blossoming quadrangle, the sun lies warm 
on the heavy grey stones, I place my hand upon the
m and feel the warmth. At the right-hand corner th
e green cathedral spire ascends into the pale blue
 sky of the evening. Between the glowing columns o
f the cloister is the cool darkness that only chur
ches have, and I stand there and wonder whether, w
hen I am twenty, I shall have experienced the bewi
ldering emotions of love. The image is alarmingly 
near; it touches me before it dissolves in the lig
ht of the next star-shell. I lay hold of my rifle 
to see that it is in trim. The barrel is wet, I ta
ke it in my hand and rub off the moisture with my 
fingers. Between the meadows behind our town there
 stands a line of old poplars by a stream. They we
re visible from a great distance, and although the
y grew on one bank only, we called them the poplar
 avenue. Even as children we had a great love for 
them, they drew us vaguely thither, we played trua
nt the whole day by them and listened to their rus
tling. We sat beneath them on the bank of the stre
am and let our feet hang over in the bright, swift
 waters. The pure fragrance of the water and the m
elody of the wind in the poplars held our fancies.
 We loved them dearly, and the image of those days
 still makes my heart pause in its beating. It is 
strange that all the memories that come have these
 two qualities. They are always completely calm, t
hat is predominant in them; and even if they are n
ot really calm, they become so. They are soundless
 apparitions that speak to me, with looks and gest
ures, silently, without any word--and it is the al
arm of their silence that forces me to lay hold of
 my sleeve and my rifle lest I should abandon myse
lf to the liberation and allurement in which my bo
dy would dilate and gently pass away into the stil
l forces that lie behind these things. They are qu
iet in this way, because quietness is so unattaina
ble for us now. At the front there is no quietness
 and the curse of the front reaches so far that we
 never pass beyond it. Even in the remote depots a
nd rest-areas the droning and the muffled noise of
 shelling is always in our ears. We are never so f
ar off that it is no more to be heard. But these l
ast few days it has been unbearable. Their stillne
ss is the reason why these memories of former time
s do not awaken desire so much as sorrow--a strang
e, inapprehensible melancholy. Once we had such de
sires--but they return not. They are past, they be
long to another world that is gone from us. In the
 barracks they called forth a rebellious, wild cra
ving for their return; for then they were still bo
und to us, we belonged to them and they to us, eve
n though we were already absent from them. They ap
peared in the soldiers' songs which we sang as we 
marched between the glow of the dawn and the black
 silhouettes of the forests to drill on the moor, 
they were a powerful remembrance that was in us an
d came from us. But here in the trenches they are 
completely lost to us. They arise no more; we are 
dead and they stand remote on the horizon, they ar
e an apparition, a mysterious reflection drawing u
s home, that we fear and love without hope. They a
re strong and our desire is strong--but they are u
nattainable, and we know it. And even if these sce
nes of our youth were given back to us we would ha
rdly know what to do. The tender, secret influence
 that passed from them into us could not arise aga
in. We long to be in them and to move in them; we 
long to remember and to love them and to be stirre
d by the sight of them. But it would be like gazin
g at the photograph of a dead comrade; those are h
is features, it is his face, and the days we spent
 together take on a mournful life in the memory; b
ut the man himself it is not. We could never again
, as the same beings, take part in those scenes. I
t was not any recognition of their beauty and thei
r significance that attracted us, but the communio
n, the feeling of a comradeship with the things an
d events of our existence, which cut us off and ma
de the world of our parents a thing incomprehensib
le to us--for then we surrendered ourselves to eve
nts and were lost in them, and the least little th
ing was enough to carry us down the stream of eter
nity. Perhaps it was only the privilege of our you
th, but as yet we recognized no limits and saw now
here an end. We had that thrill of expectation in 
the blood which united us with the course of our d
ays. To-day we would pass through the scenes of ou
r youth like travellers. We are burnt up by hard f
acts; like tradesmen we understand distinctions, a
nd like butchers, necessities. We are no longer un
troubled--we are indifferent. We long to be there;
 but could we live there? We are forlorn like chil
dren, and experienced like old men, we are crude a
nd sorrowful and superficial--I believe we are los
t. * * My hands grow cold and my flesh creeps; and
 yet the night is warm. Only the mist is cold, thi
s mysterious mist that trails the dead before us a
nd sucks from them their last, creeping life. By m
orning they will be pale and green and their blood
 congealed and black. Still the parachute-rockets 
shoot up and cast their pitiless light over the st
ony landscape, which is full of craters and frozen
 lights like a moon. The blood beneath my skin bri
ngs fear and restlessness into my thoughts. They b
ecome feeble and tremble, they desire warmth and l
ife. They cannot endure without sympathy and commu
nion, they are disordered before the naked picture
 of despair. I hear the rattle of the mess-tins an
d immediately feel a strong desire for warm food; 
it would do me good and comfort me. Painfully I fo
rce myself to wait until I am relieved. Then I go 
into the dug-out and find a mug of barley. It is c
ooked in fat and tastes good, I eat it slowly. I r
emain quiet, though the others are in a better moo
d, for the shelling has died down. * * The days go
 by and the incredible hours follow one another as
 a matter of course. Attacks alternate with counte
r-attacks and slowly the dead pile up in the field
 of craters between the trenches. We are able to b
ring in most of the wounded that do not lie too fa
r off. But many have long to wait and we listen to
 them dying. For one of them we search two days in
 vain. He must be lying on his belly and unable to
 turn over. Otherwise it is hard to understand why
 we cannot find him; for it is only when a man has
 his mouth close to the ground that it is impossib
le to gauge the direction of his cry. He must have
 been badly hit--one of those nasty wounds, neithe
r so severe that they exhaust the body at once and
 a man dreams on in a half-swoon, nor so light tha
t a man endures the pain in the hope of becoming w
ell again. Kat thinks he has either a broken pelvi
s or a shot through the spine. His chest cannot ha
ve been injured otherwise he would not have such s
trength to cry out. And if it were any other kind 
of wound it would be possible to see him moving. H
e grows gradually hoarser. The voice sounds so des
perate that it prevails everywhere. The first nigh
t some of our fellows go out three times to look f
or him. But when they think they have located him 
and crawl across, next time they hear the voice it
 seems to come from somewhere else altogether. We 
search in vain until dawn. We scrutinize the field
 all day with glasses, but discover nothing. On th
e second day the calls are fainter; that will be b
ecause his lips and mouth have become dry. Our com
pany commander has promised special leave with thr
ee days extra to anyone who finds him. That is a p
owerful inducement, but we would do all that is po
ssible without that; for his cry is terrible. Kat 
and Kropp even go out in the afternoon, and Albert
 gets the lobe of his ear shot off in consequence.
 It is to no purpose, they come back without him. 
It is easy to understand what he cries. At first h
e called only for help--the second night he must h
ave some delirium, he talks with his wife and his 
children, we often detect the name Elise. To-day h
e merely weeps. By evening the voice dwindles to a
 croaking. But it persists still through the whole
 night. We hear it so distinctly because the wind 
blows toward our line. In the morning when we supp
ose he must already have long gone to his rest, th
ere comes across to us one last gurgling rattle. T
he days are hot and the dead lie unburied. We cann
ot fetch them all in, if we did we should not know
 what to do with them. The shells will bury them. 
Many have their bellies swollen up like balloons. 
They hiss, belch, and make movements. The gases in
 them make noises. The sky is blue and without clo
uds. In the evening it grows sultry and the heat r
ises from the earth. When the wind blows toward us
 it brings the smell of blood, which is heavy and 
sweet. This deathly exhalation from the shell hole
s seems to be a mixture of chloroform and putrefac
tion, and fills us with nausea and retching. * * T
he nights become quiet and the hunt for copper dri
ving-bands and the silken parachutes of the French
 star-shells begins. Why the driving-bands are so 
desirable no one knows exactly. The collectors mer
ely assert that they are valuable. Some have colle
cted so many that they will stoop under the weight
 of them when we go back. But Haie at least gives 
a reason. He intends to give them to his girl to s
upplement her garters. At this the Friesians explo
de with mirth. They slap their knees: "By Jove tho
ugh, he's a wit, Haie is, he's got brains." Tjaden
 especially can hardly contain himself; he takes t
he largest of the rings in his hand and every now 
and then puts his leg through it to show how much 
slack there is. "Haie, man, she must have legs lik
e, legs----" his thoughts mount somewhat higher, "
and a behind too she must have, like a--like an el
ephant!" He cannot get over it. "I wish I could pl
ay hot-hand with her once, my hat----" Haie beams,
 proud that his girl should receive so much apprec
iation. "She's a nice bit," he says with self-sati
sfaction. The parachutes are turned to more practi
cal uses. According to the size of the bust three 
or perhaps four will make a blouse. Kropp and I us
e them as handkerchiefs. The others send them home
. If the women could see at what risk these bits o
f rag are often obtained, they would be horrified.
 Kat surprises Tjaden endeavouring with perfect eq
uanimity to knock the driving-band off a dud. If a
nyone else had tried it the thing would have explo
ded, but Tjaden always has his luck with him. One 
morning two butterflies play in front of our trenc
h. They are brimstone-butterflies, with red spots 
on their yellow wings. What can they be looking fo
r here? There is not a plant nor a flower for mile
s. They settle on the teeth of a skull. The birds 
too are just as carefree, they have long since acc
ustomed themselves to the war. Every morning larks
 ascend from No Man's Land. A year ago we watched 
them nesting; the young ones grew up too. We have 
a spell from the rats in the trench. They are in N
o Man's Land--we know what for. They grow fat; whe
n we see one we have a crack at it. At night we he
ar again the rolling behind the enemy lines. All d
ay we have only the normal shelling, so that we ar
e able to repair the trenches. There is always ple
nty of amusement, the airmen see to that. There ar
e countless fights for us to watch every day. Batt
le planes don't trouble us, but the observation pl
anes we hate like the plague; they put the artille
ry on to us. A couple of minutes after they appear
, shrapnel and high-explosives begin to drop on us
. We lose eleven men in one day that way, and five
 of them stretcher-bearers. Two are so smashed tha
t Tjaden remarks you could scrape them off the wal
l of the trench with a spoon and bury them in a me
ss-tin. Another has the lower part of his body and
 his legs torn off. Dead, his chest leans against 
the side of the trench, his face is lemon-yellow, 
in his beard stills burns a cigarette. It glows un
til it dies out on his lips. We put the dead in a 
large shell-hole. So far there are three layers, o
ne on top of the other. * * Suddenly the shelling 
begins to pound again. Soon we are sitting up once
 more with the rigid tenseness of blank anticipati
on. Attack, counter-attack, charge, repulse--these
 are words, but what things they signify! We have 
lost a good many men, mostly recruits. Reinforceme
nts have again been sent up to our sector. It is o
ne of the new regiments, composed of young fellows
 called up during last year. They have had hardly 
any training, and are sent into the field with onl
y a theoretical knowledge. They do know what a han
d-grenade is, it is true, but they have very littl
e idea of cover, and what is most important of all
, have no eye for it. A fold in the ground has to 
be quite eighteen inches high before they can see 
it. Although we need reinforcement, the recruits g
ive us almost more trouble than they are worth. Th
ey are helpless in this grim fighting area, they f
all like flies. The present method of fighting fro
m posts demands knowledge and experience; a man mu
st have a feeling for the contours of the ground, 
an ear for the sound and character of the shells, 
must be able to decide beforehand where they will 
drop, how they will burst, and how to shelter from
 them. The young recruits of course know none of t
hese things. They get killed simply because they c
an hardly tell shrapnel from high-explosive, they 
are mown down because they are listening anxiously
 to the roar of the big coal-boxes falling far in 
the rear, and miss the light, piping whistle of th
e low spreading little daisy-cutters. They flock t
ogether like sheep instead of scattering, and even
 the wounded are shot down like hares by the airme
n. Their pale turnip faces, their pitiful clenched
 hands, the miserable courage of these poor devils
, the desperate charges and attacks made by these 
poor brave devils, who are so terrified that they 
dare not cry out loudly, but with battered chests 
and torn bellies and arms and legs only whimper so
ftly for their mothers and cease as soon as one lo
oks at them. Their sharp, downy, dead faces have t
he awful expressionlessness of dead children. It b
rings a lump into the throat to see how they go ov
er, and run and fall. A man would like to spank th
em, they are so stupid, and to take them by the ar
m and lead them away from here where they have no 
business to be. They wear grey coats and trousers 
and boots, but for most of them the uniform is far
 too big, it hangs on their limbs, their shoulders
 are too narrow, their bodies too slight; no unifo
rm was ever made to these childish measurements. B
etween five and ten recruits fall to every old han
d. A surprise gas-attack carries off a lot of them
. They have not yet learned what to do. We found o
ne dug-out full of them, with blue heads and black
 lips. Some of them in a shell hole took their mas
ks off too soon; they did not know that the gas li
es longest in the hollows; when they saw others on
 top without masks they pulled theirs off too and 
swallowed enough to scorch their lungs. Their cond
ition is hopeless, they choke to death with hæmorr
hages and suffocation. * * In one part of the tren
ch I suddenly run into Himmelstoss. We dive into t
he same dug-out. Breathless we are all lying one b
eside the other waiting for the charge. When we ru
n out again, although I am very excited, I suddenl
y think: "Where's Himmelstoss?" Quickly I jump bac
k into the dug-out and find him with a small scrat
ch lying in a corner pretending to be wounded. His
 face looks sullen. He is in a panic; he is new to
 it too. But it makes me mad that the young recrui
ts should be out there and he here. "Get out!" I s
pit. He does not stir, his lips quiver, his mousta
che twitches. "Out!" I repeat. He draws up his leg
s, crouches back against the wall, and shows his t
eeth like a cur. I seize him by the arm and try to
 pull him up. He barks. That is too much for me. I
 grab him by the neck and shake him like a sack, h
is head jerks from side to side. "You lump, will y
ou get out--you hound, you skunk, sneak out of it,
 would you?" His eye becomes glassy, I knock his h
ead against the wall--"You cow"--I kick him in the
 ribs--"You swine"--I push him toward the door and
 shove him out head first. Another wave of our att
ack has just come up. A lieutenant is with them. H
e sees us and yells; "Forward, forward, join in, f
ollow." And the word of command does what all my b
anging could not. Himmelstoss hears the order, loo
ks round him as if awakened, and follows on. I com
e after and watch him go over. Once more he is the
 smart Himmelstoss of the parade-ground, he has ev
en outstripped the lieutenant and is far ahead. Bo
mbardment, barrage, curtain-fire, mines, gas, tank
s, machine-guns, hand-grenades--words, words, but 
they hold the horror of the world. Our faces are e
ncrusted, our thoughts are devastated, we are wear
y to death; when the attack comes we shall have to
 strike many of the men with our fists to waken th
em and make them come with us--our eyes are burnt,
 our hands are torn, our knees bleed, our elbows a
re raw. How long has it been? Weeks--months--years
? Only days. We see time pass in the colourless fa
ces of the dying, we cram food into us, we run, we
 throw, we shoot, we kill, we lie about, we are fe
eble and spent, and nothing supports us but the kn
owledge that there are still feebler, still more s
pent, still more helpless ones there who, with sta
ring eyes, look upon us as gods that escape death 
many times. In the few hours of rest we teach them
. "There, see that waggle-top? That's a mortar com
ing. Keep down, it will go clean over. But if it c
omes this way, then run for it. You can run from a
 mortar." We sharpen their ears to the malicious, 
hardly audible buzz of the smaller shells that are
 not so easily distinguished. They must pick them 
out from the general din by their insect-like hum-
-we explain to them that these are far more danger
ous than the big ones that can be heard long befor
ehand. We show them how to take cover from aircraf
t, how to simulate a dead man when one is overrun 
in an attack, how to time hand-grenades so that th
ey explode half a second before hitting the ground
; we teach them to fling themselves into holes as 
quick as lightning before the shells with instanta
neous fuses; we show them how to clean up a trench
 with a handful of bombs; we explain the differenc
e between the fuse-length of the enemy bombs and o
ur own; we put them wise to the sound of gas shell
s;--show them all the tricks that can save them fr
om death. They listen, they are docile--but when i
t begins again, in their excitement they do everyt
hing wrong. Haie Westhus drags off with a great wo
und in his back through which the lung pulses at e
very breath. I can only press his hand; "It's all 
up, Paul," he groans and bites his arm because of 
the pain. We see men living with their skulls blow
n open; we see soldiers run with their two feet cu
t off, they stagger on their splintered stumps int
o the next shell-hole; a lance-corporal crawls a m
ile and a half on his hands dragging his smashed k
nee after him; another goes to the dressing statio
n and over his clasped hands bulge his intestines;
 we see men without mouths, without jaws, without 
faces; we find one man who has held the artery of 
his arm in his teeth for two hours in order not to
 bleed to death. The sun goes down, night comes, t
he shells whine, life is at an end. Still the litt
le piece of convulsed earth in which we lie is hel
d. We have yielded no more than a few hundred yard
s of it as a prize to the enemy. But on every yard
 there lies a dead man. * * We have been relieved.
 The wheels roll beneath us, we stand dully, and w
hen the call "Mind--wire" comes, we bend our knees
. It was summer when we came up, the trees were st
ill green, now it is autumn and the night is grey 
and wet. The lorries stop, we climb out--a confuse
d heap, a remnant of many names. On either side st
and people, dark, calling out the numbers of the r
egiments, the companies. And at each call a little
 group separates itself off, a small handful of di
rty, pallid soldiers, a dreadfully small handful, 
and a dreadfully small remnant. Now someone is cal
ling the number of our company, it is, yes, the Co
mpany-Commander, he has got one too, his arm is in
 a sling. We go over to him and I recognize Kat an
d Albert, we stand together, lean against each oth
er, and look at one another. And we hear the numbe
r of our company called again and again. He will c
all a long time, they do not hear him in the hospi
tals and shell-holes. Once again: "Second Company,
 this way!" And then more softly: "Nobody else Sec
ond Company?" He is silent, and then huskily he sa
ys: "Is that all?" and gives the order: "Number!" 
The morning is grey, it was still summer when we c
ame up, and we were one hundred and fifty strong. 
Now we freeze, it is autumn, the leaves rustle, th
e voices flutter out wearily: "One--two--three--fo
ur----" and cease at thirty-two. And there is a lo
ng silence before the voice asks: "Anyone else?"--
and waits and then says softly: "In squads----" an
d then breaks off and is only able to finish: "Sec
ond Company----" with difficulty: "Second Company-
-march easy!" A line, a short line trudges off int
o the morning. Thirty-two men. CHAPTER VII They ha
ve taken us farther back than usual to a field dep
ot so that we can be re-organized. Our company nee
ds more than a hundred reinforcements. In the mean
time, when we are off duty, we loaf around. After 
a couple of days Himmelstoss comes up to us. He ha
s had the bounce knocked out of him since he has b
een in the trenches and wants to get on good terms
 with us. I am willing enough, because I saw how h
e brought Haie Westhus in when he was hit in the b
ack. Besides he's decent enough to treat us at the
 canteen when we are out of funds. Only Tjaden is 
still reserved and suspicious. But he is won over,
 too, when Himmelstoss tells us that he is taking 
the place of the sergeant-cook who has gone on lea
ve. As a proof he produces on the spot two pounds 
of sugar for us and a half-pound of butter special
ly for Tjaden. He even sees to it that we are deta
iled the next two or three days to the cook house 
for potato and turnip peeling. The grub he gives u
s there is real officers' fare. Thus for the momen
t we have the two things a soldier needs for conte
ntment: good food and rest. That's not much when o
ne comes to think of it. A couple of years ago we 
would have despised ourselves terribly. But now we
 are quite happy. It is all a matter of habit--eve
n the front line. Habit is the explanation of why 
we seem to forget things so quickly. Yesterday we 
were under fire, to-day we act the fool and go for
aging through the countryside, to-morrow we go up 
to the trenches again. We forget nothing really. B
ut so long as we have to stay here in the field, t
he front-line days, when they are past, sink down 
in us like a stone; they are too serious for us to
 be able to reflect on them at once. If we did tha
t, we should have been destroyed long ago. I soon 
found out this much:--terror can be endured so lon
g as a man simply ducks;--but it kills, if a man t
hinks about it. Just as we turn into animals when 
we go up to the line, because that is the only thi
ng which brings us through safely, so we turn into
 wags and loafers when we are out resting. We can 
do nothing else, it is a sheer necessity. We want 
to live at any price; so we cannot burden ourselve
s with feelings which, though they might be orname
ntal enough in peace time, would be out of place h
ere. Kemmerich is dead, Haie Westhus is dying, the
y will have a job with Hans Kramer's body at the J
udgment Day, piecing it together after a direct hi
t; Martens has no legs any more, Meyer is dead, Ma
x is dead, Beyer is dead, Hammerling is dead, ther
e are a hundred and twenty wounded men lying somew
here or other; it is a damnable business, but what
 has it to do with us now--we live. If it were pos
sible for us to save them, then it would be seen h
ow much we cared--we would have a shot at it thoug
h we went under ourselves; for we can be damned qu
ixotic when we like; fear we do not know much abou
t--terror of death, yes; but that is a different m
atter, that is physical. But our comrades are dead
, we cannot help them, they have their rest--and w
ho knows what is waiting for us? We will make ours
elves comfortable and sleep, and eat as much as we
 can stuff into our bellies, and drink and smoke s
o that the hours are not wasted. Life is short. * 
* The terror of the front sinks deep down when we 
turn our backs upon it; we make grim, coarse jests
 about it, when a man dies, then we say he had nip
ped off his turd, and so we speak of everything; t
hat keeps us from going mad; as long as we take it
 that way we maintain our own resistance. But we d
o not forget. It's all rot that they put in the wa
r-news about the good humour of the troops, how th
ey are arranging dances almost before they are out
 of the front-line. We don't act like that because
 we are in a good humour: we are in a good humour 
because otherwise we should go to pieces. If it we
re not so we could not hold out much longer; our h
umour becomes more bitter every month. And this I 
know: all these things that now, while we are stil
l in the war, sink down in us like a stone, after 
the war shall waken again, and then shall begin th
e disentanglement of life and death. The days, the
 weeks, the years out here shall come back again, 
and our dead comrades shall then stand up again an
d march with us, our heads shall be clear, we shal
l have a purpose, and so we shall march, our dead 
comrades beside us, the years at the Front behind 
us:--against whom, against whom? * * Some time ago
 there was an army theatre in these parts. Coloure
d posters of the performances are still sticking o
n a hoarding. With wide eyes Kropp and I stand in 
front of it. We can hardly credit that such things
 still exist. A girl in a light summer dress, with
 a red patent-leather belt about her hips! She is 
standing with one hand on a railing and with the o
ther she holds a straw hat. She wears white stocki
ngs and white shoes, fine buckle shoes with high h
eels. Behind her smiles a blue lake with white-hor
ses, at the side is a bright bay. She is a lovely 
girl with a delicate nose, red lips, and slender l
egs, wonderfully clean and well cared for, she cer
tainly bathes twice a day and never has any dirt u
nder her nails. At most perhaps a bit of sand from
 the beach. Beside her stands a man in white trous
ers, a bluejacket, and sailor's cap; but he intere
sts us much less. The girl on the poster is a wond
er to us. We have quite forgotten that there are s
uch things, and even now we hardly believe our eye
s. We have seen nothing like it for years, nothing
 like it for happiness, beauty, and joy. That is p
eace time, that is as it should be; we feel excite
d. "Just look at those thin shoes though, she coul
dn't march many miles in those," I say, and then b
egin to feel silly, for it is absurd to stand in f
ront of a picture like this and think of nothing b
ut marching. "How old would she be?" Kropp asks. "
About twenty-two at the most," I hazard. "Then she
 would be older than us! She is not more than seve
nteen, let me tell you!" It gives us goose-flesh. 
"That would be good, Albert, what do you think?" H
e nods. "I have some white trousers at home too." 
"White trousers," say I, "but a girl like that----
" We look askance at one another. There's not much
 to boast of here--two ragged, stained, and dirty 
uniforms. It is hopeless to compete. So we proceed
 to tear the young man with the white trousers off
 the hoarding, taking care not to damage the girl.
 That is something towards it. "We could go and ge
t deloused, anyway," Kropp then suggests. I am not
 very enthusiastic because it doesn't do one's clo
thes any good and a man is lousy again inside two 
hours. But when we have considered the picture onc
e more, I declare myself willing. I even go farthe
r. "We might see if we could get a clean shirt as 
well----" "Socks might be better," says Albert, no
t without reason. "Yes, socks too perhaps. Let's g
o and explore a bit." Then Leer and Tjaden stroll 
up; they look at the poster and immediately the co
nversation becomes smutty. Leer was the first of o
ur class to have intercourse, and he gave stirring
 details of it. After his fashion he enjoys himsel
f over the picture, and Tjaden supports him nobly.
 It does not distress us exactly. Who isn't smutty
 is no soldier; it merely does not suit us at the 
moment, so we edge away and march off to the delou
sing station with the same feeling as if it were a
 swell gentlemen's outfitters. * * The houses in w
hich we are billeted lie near the canal. On the ot
her side of the canal there are ponds flanked with
 poplars;--on the other side of the canal there ar
e women too. The houses on our side have been aban
doned. On the other side though one occasionally s
ees inhabitants. In the evening we go swimming. Th
ree women come strolling along the bank. They walk
 slowly and don't look away, although we have no b
athing suits. Leer calls out to them. They laugh a
nd stop to watch us. We fling remarks at them in b
roken French, anything that comes into our heads, 
hastily and all jumbled together, anything to deta
in them. They are not specially wonderful pieces, 
but then where are such to be had about here? Ther
e is one slim little brunette. Her teeth gleam whe
n she laughs. She has quick movements, her dress s
wings loosely about her legs. Although the water i
s cold we are very jovial and do our best to inter
est them so that they will stay. We try to make jo
kes and they answer with things we cannot understa
nd; we laugh and beckon. Tjaden is more crafty. He
 runs into the house, gets a loaf of army bread an
d holds it up. That produces a great effect. They 
nod and beckon us to come over. But we don't dare 
to do that. It is forbidden to cross to the opposi
te bank. There are sentries on all the bridges. It
's impossible without a pass. So we indicate that 
they should come over to us; but they shake their 
heads and point to the bridge. They are not allowe
d to pass either. They turn away and walk slowly d
own the canal, keeping along the tow-path all the 
way. We accompany them swimming. After a few hundr
ed yards they turn off and point to a house that s
tands a little distance away among the trees and s
hrubbery. Leer asks if they live there. They laugh
--sure, that's their house. We call out to them th
at we would like to come, sometime when the guards
 cannot see us. At night. To-night. They raise the
ir hands, put them together, rest their faces on t
hem and shut their eyes. They understand. The slim
 brunette does a two-step. The blonde girl twitter
s: "Bread--good----" Eagerly we assure them that w
e will bring some with us. And other tasty bits to
o, we roll our eyes and try to explain with our ha
nds. Leer nearly drowns trying to demonstrate a sa
usage. If it were necessary we would promise them 
a whole quartermaster's store. They go off and fre
quently turn and look back. We climb out on the ba
nk on our side of the canal and watch to see wheth
er they go into the house for they might easily ha
ve been lying. Then we swim back. No one can cross
 the bridge without leave, so we will simply have 
to swim over at night. We are full of excitement. 
We cannot last out without a drink, so we go to th
e canteen where there is beer and a kind of punch.
 We drink punch and tell one another lying tales o
f our experiences. Each man gladly believes the ot
her man's story, only waiting impatiently till he 
can cap it with a taller one. Our hands are fidget
y, we smoke countless cigarettes, until Kropp says
: "We might as well take them a couple of cigarett
es too." So we put some inside our caps to keep th
em. The sky turns apple-green. There are four of u
s, but only three can go; we must shake off Tjaden
, so ply him with rum and punch until he rocks. As
 it turns dark we go to our billets, Tjaden in the
 centre. We are all glowing and full of a lust for
 adventure. The little brunette is mine, we settle
d that by cutting for her. Tjaden drops on his sac
k of straw and snores. Once he wakes up and grins 
so craftily that we are alarmed and begin to think
 he is cheating, and that we have given him the pu
nch to no purpose. Then he drops back again and sl
eeps on. We each get hold of a whole army loaf and
 wrap it up in newspaper. The cigarettes we put in
 too, as well as three good rations of liver-sausa
ge that were issued to us this evening. That makes
 a decent present. We stow the things carefully in
 our boots; we have to take them to protect our fe
et against treading on wire and broken glass on th
e other bank. As we must swim for it we can take n
o other clothes. But it is not far and quite dark.
 We make off with our boots in our hands. Swiftly 
we slip into the water, lie on our backs and swim,
 holding the boots with their contents up over our
 heads. We climb out carefully on the opposite ban
k, take out the packages and put on our boots. We 
put the things under our arms. And so, all wet and
 naked, clothed only in our boots, we break into a
 trot. We find the house at once. It lies among th
e trees. Leer trips over a root and skins his elbo
ws. "No matter," he says gaily. The windows are sh
uttered. We slip round the house and try to peer t
hrough the cracks. Then we grow impatient. Suddenl
y Kropp hesitates: "What if there's a Major in wit
h them?" "Then we just clear off," grins Leer, "he
 can try to read our regimental numbers here," and
 smacks his behind. The door of the court-yard sta
nds open. Our boots make a great clatter. The hous
e door opens, a chink of light shines through and 
a woman cries out in a scared voice. "Ssh, ssh! ca
merade--bon ami--" we say, and show our packages p
rotestingly. The other two are now on the scene, t
he door opens wide and the light floods over us. T
hey recognize us and all three burst into laughter
 at our appearance. They rock and sway in the door
way, they laugh so much. How supple their movement
s are! "Un moment--" They disappear and throw us b
its of clothing which we gladly wrap round ourselv
es. Then we venture in. A small lamp burns in the 
room, which is warm and smells a little of perfume
. We unwrap our parcels and hand them over to the 
women. Their eyes shine, it is obvious that they a
re hungry. Then we all become rather embarrassed. 
Leer makes the gestures of eating, and then they c
ome to life again and bring out plates and knives 
and fall to on the food, and they hold up every sl
ice of liver-sausage and admire it before they eat
 it, and we sit proudly by. They overwhelm us with
 their chatter;--we understand very little of it, 
but we listen and the words sound friendly. No dou
bt we all look very young. The little brunette str
okes my hair and says what all the French women sa
y: "La guerre--grand malheur--pauvres garçons----"
 I hold her arm tightly and press my lips into the
 palm of her hand. Her fingers close round my face
. Close above me are her bewildering eyes, the sof
t brown of her skin and her red lips. Her mouth sp
eaks words I do not understand. Nor do I fully und
erstand her eyes; they seem to say more than we an
ticipated when we came here. There are other rooms
 adjoining. In passing I see Leer, he has made a g
reat hit with the blonde. And he knows it, too. Bu
t I--I am lost in remoteness, in weakness, and in 
a passion to which I yield myself trustingly. My d
esires are strangely compounded of yearning and mi
sery. I feel giddy, there is nothing here that a m
an can hold on to. We have left our boots at the d
oor, they have given us slippers instead, and now 
nothing remains to recall for me the assurance and
 self-confidence of the soldier: no rifle, no belt
, no tunic, no cap. I let myself drop into the unk
nown, come what may--yet, in spite of all, I feel 
somewhat afraid. The little brunette contracts her
 brows when she is thinking; but when she talks th
ey are still. And often the sound does not quite b
ecome a word but suffocates or floats away over me
 half-finished; an arch, a pathway, a comet. What 
have I known of it--what do I know of it?--The wor
ds of this foreign tongue, that I hardly understan
d, they caress me to a quietness, in which the roo
m grows dim, and dissolves in the half light, and 
only the face above me lives and is clear. How var
ious is a face; but an hour ago it was strange and
 now it is touched with a tenderness that comes, n
ot from it, but out of the night, the world and th
e blood, all these things seem to shine in it toge
ther. The objects in the room are touched by it an
d transformed, they become isolated, and I feel al
most awed at the sight of my clear skin when the l
ight of the lamp falls upon it and the cool, brown
 hand passes over it. How different all this is fr
om the conditions in the soldier's brothels, to wh
ich we are allowed to go, and where we have to wai
t in long queues. I wish I never thought of them; 
but desire turns my mind to them involuntarily and
 I am afraid, for it might be impossible ever to b
e free of them again. But then I feel the lips of 
the little brunette and press myself against them,
 my eyes close and I let it all fall from me, war 
and terror and grossness, in order to awaken young
 and happy; I think of the picture of the girl on 
the poster and, for a moment, believe that my life
 depends on winning her. And if I press ever deepe
r into the arms that embrace me, perhaps a miracle
 may happen.... . . . . . . . . So, after a time w
e find ourselves reassembled again. Leer is in hig
h spirits. We pull on our boots and take our leave
 warmly. The night air cools our hot bodies. The r
ustling poplars loom large in the darkness. The mo
on floats in the heavens and in the waters of the 
canal. We do not run, we walk beside one another w
ith long strides. "That was worth a ration-loaf," 
says Leer. I cannot trust myself to speak, I am no
t in the least happy. Then we hear footsteps and d
odge behind a shrub. The steps come nearer, close 
by us. We see a naked soldier, in boots, just like
 ourselves; he has a package under his arm, and ga
llops onward. It is Tjaden in full course. He has 
disappeared already. We laugh. In the morning he w
ill curse us. Unobserved, we arrive again at our s
acks of straw. * * I am called to the Orderly Room
. The Company Commander gives me a leave-pass and 
a travel-pass and wishes me a good journey. I look
 to see how much leave I have got. Seventeen days-
-fourteen days leave and three days for travelling
. It is not enough and I ask whether I cannot have
 five days for travelling. Bertinck points to my p
ass. There I see that I am not to return to the fr
ont immediately. After my leave I have to report f
or a course of training to a camp on the moors. Th
e others congratulate me. Kat gives me good advice
, and tells me I ought to try to get a base-job. "
If you are smart, you'll hang on to it." I would r
ather not have gone for another eight days; we are
 to stay here that much longer and it is good here
. Naturally I have to stand the others drinks at t
he canteen. We are all a little bit drunk. I becom
e gloomy: I will be away for six weeks-- That is l
ucky of course, but what may happen before I get b
ack? Shall I meet all these fellows again? Already
 Haie has gone--who will the next be? As we drink,
 I look at each of them in turn. Albert sits besid
e me and smokes, he is silent, we have always been
 together;--opposite squats Kat, with his drooping
 shoulders, his broad thumb, and calm voice--Mülle
r with the protruding teeth and the booming laugh;
 Tjaden with his mousey eyes;--Leer who has grown 
a full beard and looks at least forty. Over us han
gs a dense cloud of smoke. Where would a soldier b
e without tobacco. The canteen is his refuge, and 
beer is far more than a drink, it is a token that 
a man can move his limbs and stretch in safety. We
 do it ceremonially, we stretch our legs out in fr
ont of us and spit deliberately, that is the only 
way. How it all rises up before a man when he is g
oing away the next morning! At night we go again t
o the other side of the canal. I am almost afraid 
to tell the little brunette that I am going away, 
and when I return we will certainly be far away fr
om here; we will never see one another again. But 
she merely nods and takes no special notice. At fi
rst I am at a loss to understand, then it suddenly
 dawns on me. Yes, Leer is right: if I were going 
up to the front, then she would have again called 
me "pauvre garçon"; but merely going on leave--she
 does not want to hear about that, that is not nea
rly so interesting. May she go to the devil with h
er chattering talk. A man dreams of a miracle and 
wakes up to loaves of bread. Next morning, after I
 have been de-loused, I go to the rail head. Alber
t and Kat come with me. At the halt we learn that 
it will be a couple of hours yet before the train 
leaves. The other two have to go back to duty. We 
take leave of one another. "Good luck, Kat; good l
uck, Albert." They go off and wave once or twice. 
Their figures dwindle. I know their every step and
 movement; I would recognize them at any distance.
 Then they disappear. I sit down on my pack and wa
it. Suddenly I become filled with a consuming impa
tience to be gone. * * I lie down on many a statio
n platform; I stand before many a soup-kitchen; I 
squat on many a bench;--then at last the landscape
 becomes gloomy, mysterious, and familiar. It glid
es past the western windows with its villages, the
ir thatched roofs like caps, pulled over the white
-washed, half-timbered houses, its corn-fields, gl
eaming like mother-of-pearl in the slanting light,
 its orchards, its barns and old lime trees. The n
ames of the stations begin to take on meaning and 
my heart trembles. The train stamps and stamps onw
ard, I stand at the window and hold on to the fram
e. These names mark the boundaries of my youth. Sm
ooth meadows, fields, farm-yards; a solitary team 
moves against the sky-line along the road that run
s parallel to the horizon--a barrier, before which
 peasants stand waiting, girls waving, children pl
aying on the embankment, roads, leading into the c
ountry, smooth roads without artillery. It is even
ing, and if the train did not rattle I should cry 
out. The plain unfolds itself. In the distance, th
e soft, blue silhouette of the mountain ranges beg
ins to appear. I recognize the characteristic outl
ine of the Dolbenberg, a jagged comb, springing up
 precipitously from the limit of the forests. Behi
nd it should lie the town. But now the sun streams
 through the world, dissolving everything in its g
olden-red light, the train swings round one curve 
and then another;--far away, in a long line one be
hind the other, stand the poplars, unsubstantial, 
swaying and dark, fashioned out of shadow, light, 
and desire. The field swings round as the train en
circles it, and the intervals between the trees di
minish; the trees become a block and for a moment 
I see one only--then they reappear from behind the
 foremost tree and stand out a long line against t
he sky until they are hidden by the first houses. 
A street-crossing. I stand at the window, I cannot
 drag myself away. The others put their baggage re
ady for getting out. I repeat to myself the name o
f the Street that we cross ever--Bremerstrasse--Br
emerstrasse-- Below there are cyclists, lorries, m
en; it is a grey street and a grey subway;--it emb
races me as though it were my mother. Then the tra
in stops, and there is the station with noise and 
cries and sentries. I pick up my pack and fasten t
he straps, I take my rifle in my hand and stumble 
down the steps. On the platform I look round; I kn
ow no one among all the people hurrying to and fro
. A red-cross sister offers me something to drink.
 I turn away, she smiles at me too foolishly, so o
bsessed with her own importance: "Just look, I am 
giving a soldier coffee!"--She calls me "Comrade,"
 but I will have none of it. Outside in front of t
he station the stream roars alongside the street, 
it rushes foaming from the sluices of the mill bri
dge. There stands the old, square watch-tower, in 
front of it the great mottled lime tree and behind
 it the evening. Here we have often sat--how long 
ago it is--; we have passed over this bridge and b
reathed the cool, acid smell of the stagnant water
; we have leaned over the still water on this side
 of the lock, where the green creepers and weeds h
ang from the piles of the bridge;--and on hot days
 we rejoiced in the spouting foam on the other sid
e of the lock and told tales about our school-teac
hers. I pass over the bridge, I look right and lef
t; the water is as full of weeds as ever, and it s
till shoots over in gleaming arches; in the tower-
building laundresses still stand with bare arms as
 they used to over the clean linen, and the heat f
rom the ironing pours out through the open windows
. Dogs trot along the narrow street, before the do
ors of the houses people stand and follow me with 
their gaze as I pass by, dirty and heavy laden. In
 this confectioner's we used to eat ices, and ther
e we learned to smoke cigarettes. Walking down the
 street I know every shop, the colonial warehouse,
 the chemist's, the tobacconist's. Then at last I 
stand before the brown door with its worn latch an
d my hand grows heavy. I open the door and a wonde
rful freshness comes out to meet me, my eyes are d
im. The stairs creak under my boots. Upstairs a do
or rattles, someone is looking over the railing. I
t is the kitchen door that was opened, they are co
oking potato-cakes, the house reeks of it, and to-
day of course is Saturday; that will be my sister 
leaning over. For a moment I am shy and lower my h
ead, then I take off my helmet and look up. Yes, i
t is my eldest sister. "Paul," she cries, "Paul---
-" I nod, my pack bumps against the banisters; my 
rifle is so heavy. She pulls a door open and calls
: "Mother, mother, Paul is here." I can go no furt
her--mother, mother, Paul is here. I lean against 
the wall and grip my helmet and rifle. I hold them
 as tight as I can, but I cannot take another step
, the staircase fades before my eyes, I support my
self with the butt of my rifle against my feet and
 clench my teeth fiercely, but I cannot speak a wo
rd, my sister's call has made me powerless, I can 
do nothing, I struggle to make myself laugh, to sp
eak, but no word comes, and so I stand on the step
s, miserable, helpless, paralysed, and against my 
will the tears run down my cheeks. My sister comes
 back and says: "Why, what is the matter?" Then I 
pull myself together and stagger on to the landing
. I lean my rifle in a corner, I set my pack again
st the wall, place my helmet on it, and fling down
 my equipment and baggage. Then I say fiercely: "B
ring me a handkerchief." She gives me one from the
 cupboard and I dry my face. Above me on the wall 
hangs the glass case with the coloured butterflies
 that once I collected. Now I hear my mother's voi
ce. It comes from the bedroom. "Is she in bed?" I 
ask my sister. "She is ill--" she replies. I go in
 to her, give her my hand and say as calmly as I c
an: "Here I am, mother." She lies still in the dim
 light. Then she asks anxiously: "Are you wounded?
" and I feel her searching glance. "No, I have got
 leave." My mother is very pale. I am afraid to ma
ke a light. "Here I lie now," says she, "and cry i
nstead of being glad." "Are you sick, mother?" I a
sk. "I am going to get up a little to-day," she sa
ys and turns to my sister, who is continually runn
ing to the kitchen to watch that the food does not
 burn: "And put out the jar of preserved whortlebe
rries--you like that, don't you?" she asks me. "Ye
s, mother, I haven't had any for a long time." "We
 might almost have known you were coming," laughs 
my sister, "there is just your favourite dish, pot
ato-cakes, and even whortle-berries to go with the
m too." "And it is Saturday," I add. "Sit here bes
ide me," says my mother. She looks at me. Her hand
s are white and sickly and frail compared with min
e. We say very little, and I am thankful that she 
asks nothing. What ought I to say? Everything I co
uld have wished for has happened. I have come out 
of it safely and sit here beside her. And in the k
itchen stands my sister making the evening bread a
nd singing. "Dear boy," says my mother softly. We 
were never very demonstrative in our family; poor 
folk who toil and are full of cares are not so. It
 is not their way to protest what they already kno
w. When my mother says to me "dear boy," it means 
much more than when another uses it. I know well e
nough that the jar of whortleberries is the only o
ne they have had for months, and that she has kept
 it for me; and the somewhat stale cakes that she 
gives me too. She has taken a favourable opportuni
ty of getting a few and has put them all by for me
. I sit by her bed, and through the window the che
stnut trees in the beer garden opposite glow in br
own and gold. I breathe deeply and say over to mys
elf:--"You are at home, you are at home." But a se
nse of strangeness will not leave me, I can find n
othing of myself in all these things. There is my 
mother, there is my sister, there my case of butte
rflies, and there the mahogany piano--but I am not
 myself there. There is a distance, a veil between
 us. I go and fetch my pack to the bedside and tur
n out the things I have brought--a whole Edamer ch
eese, that Kat provided me with, two loaves of arm
y bread, three-quarters of a pound of butter, two 
tins of liver-sausage, a pound of dripping and a l
ittle bag of rice. "I suppose you can make some us
e of that----" They nod. "Is it pretty bad for foo
d here?" I enquire. "Yes, there's not much. Do you
 get enough out there?" I smile and point to the t
hings I have brought. "Not always quite so much as
 that, of course, but we fare reasonably well." Er
na goes out to bring in the food. Suddenly my moth
er seizes hold of my hand and asks falteringly: "W
as it very bad out there, Paul?" Mother, what shou
ld I answer to that! You would not understand, and
 never realize it. And you never should realize it
. Was it bad, you ask.--You, Mother,--I shake my h
ead and say: "No, mother, not so very. There are a
lways a lot of us together so it isn't so bad." "Y
es, but Heinrich Bredemeyer was here just lately a
nd he said it was terrible out there now, with the
 gas and all the rest of it." It is my mother who 
says that. She says: "With the gas and all the res
t of it." She does not know what she is saying, sh
e is merely anxious for me. Should I tell her how 
we once found three enemy trenches with their garr
ison all stiff as though stricken with apoplexy? A
gainst the parapet, in the dugouts, just where the
y were, the men stood and lay about, with blue fac
es, dead. "No, mother, that's only talk," I answer
, "there's not very much in what Bredemeyer says. 
You see for instance, I'm well and fit----" Before
 my mother's tremulous anxiety I recover my compos
ure. Now I can walk about and talk and answer ques
tions without fear of having suddenly to lean agai
nst the wall because the world turns soft as rubbe
r and my veins become brimstone. My mother wants t
o get up. So I go for a while to my sister in the 
kitchen. "What is the matter with her?" I ask. She
 shrugs her shoulders: "She has been in bed two mo
nths now, but we did not want to write and tell yo
u. Several doctors have been to see her. One of th
em said it is probably cancer again." * * I go to 
the district commandant to report myself. Slowly I
 wander through the streets. Occasionally someone 
speaks to me. I do not delay long for I have littl
e inclination to talk. On my way back from the bar
racks a loud voice calls out to me. Still lost in 
thought I turn round and find myself confronted by
 a Major. "Can't you salute?" he blusters. "Sorry,
 Major," I say in embarrassment, "I didn't notice 
you." "Don't you know how to speak properly?" he r
oars. I would like to hit him in the face, but con
trol myself, for my leave depends on it. I click m
y heels and say: "I did not see you, Herr Major." 
"Then keep your eyes open," he snorts. "What is yo
ur name?" I give it. His fat red face is furious. 
"What regiment?" I give him full particulars. Even
 yet he has not had enough. "Where are they?" But 
I have had more than enough and say: "Between Lang
emark and Bixschoote." "Eh?" he asks, a bit stupef
ied. I explain to him that I arrived on leave only
 an hour or two since, thinking that he would then
 trot along. But not at all. He gets even more fur
ious: "You think you can bring your front-line man
ners here, what? Well, we don't stand that sort of
 thing. Thank God, we have discipline here!" "Twen
ty paces backwards, double march!" he commands. I 
am mad with rage. But I cannot say anything to him
; he could put me under arrest if he liked. So I d
ouble back, and then march up to him. Six paces fr
om him I spring to a stiff salute and maintain it 
until I am six paces beyond him. He calls me back 
again and affably gives me to understand that for 
once he is pleased to put mercy before justice. I 
pretend to be duly grateful. "Now, dismiss!" he sa
ys. I turn about smartly and march off. That ruins
 the evening for me. I go back home and throw my u
niform into a corner; I ought to have done that be
fore. Then I take out my civilian clothes from the
 wardrobe and put them on. I feel awkward. The sui
t is rather tight and short, I have grown in the a
rmy. Collar and tie give me some trouble. In the e
nd my sister ties the bow for me. But how light th
e suit is, it feels as though I had nothing on but
 a shirt and underpants. I look at myself in the g
lass. It is a strange sight. A sunburnt, overgrown
 candidate for confirmation gazes at me in astonis
hment. My mother is pleased to see me wearing civi
lian clothes; it makes me less strange to her. But
 my father would rather I kept my uniform on so th
at he could take me to visit his acquaintances. Bu
t I refuse. * * It is pleasant to sit quietly some
where, in the beer-garden for example, under the c
hestnuts by the skittle-alley. The leaves fall dow
n on the table and on the ground, only a few, the 
first. A glass of beer stands in front of me, I've
 learned to drink in the army. The glass is half e
mpty, but there are still a few good swigs ahead o
f me, and besides I can always order a second and 
a third if I wish to. There are no bugles and no b
ombardments, the children of the house play in the
 skittle-alley, and the dog rests his head against
 my knee. The sky is blue, between the leaves of t
he chestnuts rises the green spire of St. Margaret
's Church. This is good, I like it. But I cannot g
et on with the people. My mother is the only one w
ho asks no questions. Not so my father. He wants m
e to tell him about the front; he is curious in a 
way that I find stupid and distressing; I no longe
r have any real contact with him. There is nothing
 he likes more than just hearing about it. I reali
ze he does not know that a man cannot talk of such
 things; I would do it willingly, but it is too da
ngerous for me to put these things into words. I a
m afraid they might then become gigantic and I be 
no longer able to master them. What would become o
f us if everything that happens out there were qui
te clear to us? So I confine myself to telling him
 a few amusing things. But he wants to know whethe
r I have ever had a hand-to-hand fight. I say "No,
" and get up and go out. But that does not mend ma
tters. After I have been startled a couple of time
s in the street by the screaming of the tramcars, 
which resembles the shriek of a shell coming strai
ght for one, somebody taps me on the shoulder. It 
is my German-master, and he fastens on me with the
 usual question: "Well, how are things out there? 
Terrible, terrible, eh? Yes, it is dreadful, but w
e must carry on. And after all, you do at least ge
t decent food out there, so I hear. You look well,
 Paul, and fit. Naturally it's worse here. Natural
ly. The best for our soldiers every time, that goe
s without saying." He drags me along to a table wi
th a lot of others. They welcome me, a head-master
 shakes hands with me and says: "So you come from 
the front? What is the spirit like out there? Exce
llent, eh? excellent?" I explain that no one would
 be sorry to be back home. He laughs uproariously.
 "I can well believe it! But first you have to giv
e the Froggies a good hiding. Do you smoke? Here, 
try one. Waiter, bring a beer as well for our youn
g warrior." Unfortunately I have accepted the ciga
r, so I have to remain. And they are all so drippi
ng with good will that it is impossible to object.
 All the same I feel annoyed and smoke like a chim
ney as hard as I can. In order to make at least so
me show of appreciation I toss off the beer in one
 gulp. Immediately a second is ordered; people kno
w how much they are indebted to the soldiers. They
 argue about what we ought to annex. The head-mast
er with the steel watch-chain wants to have at lea
st the whole of Belgium, the coal-areas of France,
 and a slice of Russia. He produces reasons why we
 must have them and is quite inflexible until at l
ast the others give in to him. Then he begins to e
xpound just whereabouts in France the break-throug
h must come, and turns to me: "Now, shove ahead a 
bit out there with your everlasting trench warfare
--Smash through the johnnies and then there will b
e peace." I reply that in our opinion a break-thro
ugh may not be possible. The enemy may have too ma
ny reserves. Besides, the war may be rather differ
ent from what people think. He dismisses the idea 
loftily and informs me I know nothing about it. "T
he details, yes," says he, "but this relates to th
e whole. And of that you are not able to judge. Yo
u see only your little sector and so cannot have a
ny general survey. You do your duty, you risk your
 lives, that deserves the highest honour--every ma
n of you ought to have the Iron Cross--but first o
f all the enemy line must be broken through in Fla
nders and then rolled up from the top." He blows h
is nose and wipes his beard. "Completely rolled up
 they must be, from the top to the bottom. And the
n to Paris." I would like to know just how he pict
ures it to himself, and pour the third glass of be
er into me. Immediately he orders another. But I b
reak away. He stuffs a few more cigars into my poc
ket and sends me off with a friendly slap. "All of
 the best! I hope we will soon hear something wort
h while from you." * * I imagined leave would be d
ifferent from this. Indeed, it was different a yea
r ago. It is I of course that have changed in the 
interval. There lies a gulf between that time and 
to-day. At that time I still knew nothing about th
e war, we had been only in quiet sectors. But now 
I see that I have been crushed without knowing it.
 I find I do not belong here any more, it is a for
eign world. Some of these people ask questions, so
me ask no questions, but one can see that they are
 quite confident they know all about it; they ofte
n say so with their air of comprehension, so there
 is no point in discussing it. They make up a pict
ure of it for themselves. I prefer to be alone, so
 that no one troubles me. For they all come back t
o the same thing, how badly it goes and how well i
t goes; one thinks it is this way, another that; a
nd yet they are always absorbed in the things that
 go to make up their own existence. Formerly I liv
ed in just the same way myself, but now I feel no 
contact here any longer. They talk to me too much.
 They have worries, aims, desires, that I can not 
comprehend. I often sit with one of them in the li
ttle beer-garden and try to explain to him that th
is is really the only thing: just to sit quietly, 
like this. They understand of course, they agree, 
they may even feel it so too, but only with words,
 only with words, yes, that is it--they feel it, b
ut always with only half of themselves, the rest o
f their being is taken up with other things, they 
are so divided in themselves that none feels it wi
th his whole essence; I cannot even say myself exa
ctly what I mean. When I see them here, in their r
ooms, in their offices, about their occupations, I
 feel an irresistible attraction in it, I would li
ke to be here too and forget the war; but also it 
repels me, it is so narrow, how can that fill a ma
n's life, he ought to smash it to bits; how can th
ey do it, while out at the front the splinters are
 whining over the shell-holes and the star-shells 
go up, the wounded are carried back on water-proof
 sheets and comrades crouch in the trenches.-- The
y are different men here, men I cannot properly un
derstand, whom I envy and despise. I must think of
 Kat and Albert and Müller and Tjaden, what will t
hey be doing? No doubt they are sitting in the can
teen, or perhaps swimming--soon they will have to 
go up to the front-line again. * * In my room behi
nd the table stands a brown leather sofa. I sit do
wn on it. On the walls are pasted countless pictur
es that I once used to cut out of the newspapers. 
In between are drawings and postcards that have co
me my way. In the corner is a small iron stove. Ag
ainst the wall opposite stand the book-shelves wit
h my books. I used to live in this room before I w
as a soldier. The books I bought gradually with th
e money I earned by coaching. Many of them are sec
ond-hand, all the classics for example, one volume
 in blue cloth boards cost one mark twenty pfennig
. I bought them complete because I was thoroughgoi
ng, I did not trust the editors of selections, eve
n though they may have chosen all the best. So I p
urchased only "collected works." I read most of th
em with laudable zeal, but few of them really appe
aled to me. I preferred the other books, the moder
ns, which were of course much dearer. A few I came
 by not quite honestly, I borrowed and did not ret
urn them because I did not want to part with them.
 One shelf is filled with school books. They are n
ot so well cared for, they are badly thumbed, and 
pages have been torn out for certain purposes. The
n below are periodicals, papers, and letters all j
ammed in together with drawings and rough sketches
. I want to think myself back into that time. It i
s still in the room, I feel it at once, the walls 
have preserved it. My hands rest on the arms of th
e sofa; now I make myself at home and draw up my l
egs so that I sit comfortably in the corner, in th
e arms of the sofa. The little window is open, thr
ough it I see the familiar picture of the street w
ith the rising spire of the church at the end. The
re are a couple of flowers on the table. Pen-holde
rs, a shell as a paper-weight, the ink-well--here 
nothing is changed. It will be like this too, if I
 am lucky, when the war is over and I come back he
re for good. I will sit here just like this and lo
ok at my room and wait. I feel excited; but I do n
ot want to be, for that is not right. I want that 
quiet rapture again. I want to feel the same power
ful, nameless urge that I used to feel when I turn
ed to my books. The breath of desire that then aro
se from the coloured backs of the books, shall fil
l me again, melt the heavy, dead lump of lead that
 lies somewhere in me and waken again the impatien
ce of the future, the quick joy in the world of th
ought, it shall bring back again the lost eagernes
s of my youth. I sit and wait. It occurs to me tha
t I must go and see Kemmerich's mother;--I might v
isit Mittelstaedt too, he should be at the barrack
s. I look out of the window;--beyond the sober pic
ture of the street appears a range of hills, dista
nt and light; it changes to a clear day in autumn,
 and I sit by the fire with Kat and Albert and eat
 potatoes baked in their skins. But I do not want 
to think of that, I sweep it away. The room shall 
speak, it must catch me up and hold me, I want to 
feel that I belong here, I want to hearken and kno
w when I go back to the front that the war will si
nk down, be drowned utterly in the great home-comi
ng tide, know that it will then be past for ever, 
and not gnaw us continually, that it will have non
e but an outward power over us. The backs of the b
ooks stand in rows. I know them all still, I remem
ber arranging them in order. I implore them with m
y eyes: Speak to me--take me up--take me, Life of 
my Youth--you who are care-free, beautiful--receiv
e me again-- I wait, I wait. Images float through 
my mind, but they do not grip me, they are mere sh
adows and memories. Nothing--nothing-- My disquiet
ude grows. A terrible feeling of foreignness sudde
nly rises up in me. I cannot find my way back, I a
m shut out though I entreat earnestly and put fort
h all my strength. Nothing stirs; listless and wre
tched, like a condemned man, I sit there and the p
ast withdraws itself. And at the same time I fear 
to importune it too much, because I do not know wh
at might happen then. I am a soldier, I must cling
 to that. Wearily I stand up and look out of the w
indow. Then I take one of the books, intending to 
read, and turn over the leaves. But I put it away 
and take out another. There are passages in it tha
t have been marked. I look, turn over the pages, t
ake up fresh books. Already they are piled up besi
de me. Speedily more join the heap, papers, magazi
nes, letters. I stand there dumb. As before a judg
e. Dejected. Words, Words, Words--they do not reac
h me. Slowly I place the books back in the shelves
. Nevermore. Quietly, I go out of the room. * * St
ill I do not give up hope. I do not, indeed, go to
 my room any more, but comfort myself with the tho
ught that a few days are not enough to judge by. A
fterwards--later on--there is plenty of time for t
hat. So I go over to see Mittelstaedt in the barra
cks, and we sit in his room, there is an atmospher
e about it that I do not like but with which I am 
quite familiar. Mittelstaedt has some news ready f
or me that electrifies me on the spot. He tells me
 Kantorek has been called up as a territorial. "Ju
st think of it," says he, and takes out a couple o
f good cigars, "I come back here from the hospital
 and bump right into him. He stretches out his paw
 to me and bleats: 'Hullo Mittelstaedt, how are yo
u?'--I look at him and say: 'Territorial Kantorek,
 business is business and schnapps is schnapps, yo
u ought to know that well enough yourself. Stand t
o attention when you speak to a superior officer.'
 You should have seen his face! A cross between a 
dud and a pickled cucumber. He tried once again to
 chum up. So I snubbed him a bit harder. Then he b
rought up his biggest guns and asked confidentiall
y: 'Would you like me to use my influence so that 
you can take an emergency-exam.?' He was trying to
 remind me of those things, you know. Then I got m
ad and I reminded him of something instead. 'Terri
torial Kantorek, two years ago you preached us int
o enlisting; and among us there was one, Joseph Be
hm, who didn't want to enlist. He was killed three
 months before he would have been called up in the
 ordinary way. If it had not been for you he would
 have lived just that much longer. And now: Dismis
s. You will hear from me later.' It was easy to ge
t put in charge of his company. First thing I did 
was to take him to the stores and fit him out with
 a suitable equipment. You will see in a minute." 
We go out to the parade ground. The company has fa
llen in. Mittelstaedt stands them at ease and insp
ects. Then I see Kantorek and am scarcely able to 
stifle my laughter. He is wearing a faded blue tun
ic. On the back and in the sleeves there are big d
ark patches. The overcoat must have belonged to a 
giant. The black, worn breeches are just as much t
oo short; they reach barely halfway down his calf.
 The boots, tough old clod-hoppers, with turned-up
 toes and laces at the side, are much too big for 
him. But as a compensation the cap is too small, a
 terribly dirty, mean little pill-box. The whole r
ig-out is just pitiful. Mittelstaedt stops in fron
t of him: "Territorial Kantorek, do you call those
 buttons polished? You seem as though you can neve
r learn. Inadequate, Kantorek, quite inadequate---
-" It makes me bubble with glee. In school Kantore
k used to chasten Mittelstaedt with exactly the sa
me expression--"Inadequate, Mittelstaedt, quite in
adequate." Mittelstaedt continues to upbraid him: 
"Look at Boettcher now, there's a model for you to
 learn from." I can hardly believe my eyes. Boettc
her is there too, Boettcher, our school porter. An
d he is a model! Kantorek shoots a glance at me as
 if he would like to eat me. But I grin at him inn
ocently, as though I do not recognize him any more
. Nothing could look more ludicrous than his forag
e-cap and his uniform. And this is the object befo
re whom we used to stand in anguish, as he sat up 
there enthroned at his desk, spearing at us with h
is pencil for our mistakes in those irregular Fren
ch verbs with which afterwards we made so little h
eadway in France. That is barely two years ago--an
d now here stands Territorial Kantorek, the spell 
quite broken, with bent knees, arms like pothooks,
 unpolished buttons and that ludicrous rig-out--an
 impossible soldier. I cannot reconcile this with 
the menacing figure at the schoolmaster's desk. I 
wonder what I, the old soldier, would do if this s
kin full of woe ever dared to say to me again: "Bä
umer, give the imperfect of 'aller.'" Then Mittels
taedt makes them practice skirmishing, and as a fa
vour appoints Kantorek squad leader. Now in skirmi
shing the squad leader has always to keep twenty p
aces in front of his squad; if the order comes "On
 the march, about turn," the line of skirmishers s
imply turns about, but the squad leader, who now f
inds himself suddenly twenty paces in rear of the 
line, has to rush up at the double and take his po
sition again twenty paces in front of the squad. T
hat makes altogether forty paces double-march. But
 no sooner has he arrived than the order "On the m
arch, about turn," comes again and he once more ha
s to race at top speed another forty paces to the 
other side. In this way the squad has made merely 
the turn-about and a couple of paces while the squ
ad-leader dashes backwards and forwards like a far
t on a curtain pole. That is one of Himmelstoss' w
ell-worn recipes. Kantorek can hardly expect anyth
ing else from Mittelstaedt, for he once messed up 
the latter's chance of promotion, and Mittelstaedt
 would be a big fool not to make the best of such 
a good opportunity as this, before he goes back to
 the front again. A man might well die easier afte
r the army has given him just one such stroke of l
uck. In the meantime Kantorek is dashing up and do
wn like a wild-boar. After a while Mittelstaedt st
ops the skirmish and begins the very important exe
rcise of creeping. On hands and knees, carrying hi
s gun in regulation fashion, Kantorek shoves his a
bsurd figure over the sand immediately in front of
 us. He is breathing hard, and his panting is musi
c. Mittelstaedt encourages Kantorek the Territoria
l with quotations from Kantorek the school-master.
 "Territorial Kantorek, we have the good fortune t
o live in a great age, we must all humble ourselve
s and for once put aside bitterness." Kantorek swe
ats and spits out a dirty piece of wood that has l
odged in his teeth. Mittelstaedt stoops down and s
ays reproachfully: "And in the trifles never lose 
sight of the great adventure, Territorial Kantorek
!" It amazes me that Kantorek does not explode wit
h a bang, especially when, during physical exercis
es, Mittelstaedt copies him to perfection, seizing
 him by the seat of his trousers as he is climbing
 along the horizontal bar, so that he can just rai
se his chin above the beam, and then starts to giv
e him good advice. That is exactly what Kantorek u
sed to do to him at school. The extra fatigues are
 next detailed off. "Kantorek and Boettcher, bread
 fatigue! Take the handcart with you." In a couple
 of minutes the two set off together pushing the b
arrow. Kantorek in a fury walks with his head down
. But the porter is delighted to have scored light
 duty. The bakehouse is away at the other end of t
he town, and the two must go there and back throug
h the whole length of it. "They've done that a cou
ple of times already," grins Mittelstaedt. "There 
are still a few people waiting to see them." "Exce
llent," I say, "but hasn't he reported you yet?" "
He did try. Our C.O. laughed like the deuce when h
e heard the story. He hasn't any time for schoolma
sters. Besides, I'm sweet with his daughter." "He'
ll mess up the examination for you." "I don't care
," says Mittelstaedt calmly. "Besides, his complai
nt came to nothing because I could show that he ha
d had hardly anything but light duty." "Couldn't y
ou polish him up a bit?" I ask. "He's too stupid, 
I couldn't be bothered," answers Mittelstaedt cont
emptuously. * * What is leave?--A pause that only 
makes everything after it so much worse. Already t
he sense of parting begins to intrude itself. My m
other watches me silently,--I know she counts the 
days;--every morning she is sad. It is one day les
s. She has put away my pack, she does not want to 
be reminded by it. The hours pass quickly if a man
 broods. I pull myself together, and go with my si
ster to the butcher's to get a pound of bones. Tha
t is a great luxury and people line up early in th
e morning and stand waiting. Many of them faint. W
e have no luck. After waiting by turns for three h
ours the queue disperses. The bones have not laste
d out. It is a good thing I get my rations. I brin
g them to my mother and in that way we all get som
ething decent to eat. The days grow ever more stra
ined and my mother's eyes more sorrowful. Four day
s left now. I must go and see Kemmerich's mother. 
* * I cannot write that down. This quaking, sobbin
g woman who shakes me and cries out on me: "Why ar
e you living then, when he is dead?"--who drowns m
e in tears and calls out: "What are you there for 
at all, child, when you----"--who drops into a cha
ir and wails: "Did you see him? Did you see him th
en? How did he die?" I tell her he was shot throug
h the heart and died instantaneously. She looks at
 me, she doubts me: "You lie. I know better. I hav
e felt how terribly he died. I have heard his voic
e at night, I have felt his anguish--tell the trut
h, I want to know it, I must know it." "No," I say
, "I was beside him. He died at once." She pleads 
with me gently: "Tell me. You must tell me. I know
 you want to comfort me, but don't you see, you to
rment me far more than if you told me the truth? I
 cannot bear the uncertainty. Tell me how it was a
nd even though it will be terrible, it will be far
 better than what I have to think if you don't." I
 will never tell her, she can make mincemeat out o
f me first. I console her, but she strikes me as r
ather stupid all the same. Why doesn't she stop wo
rrying? Kemmerich will stay dead whether she knows
 about it or not. When a man has seen so many dead
 he cannot understand any longer why there should 
be so much anguish over a single individual. So I 
say rather impatiently: "He died immediately. He f
elt absolutely nothing at all. His face was quite 
calm." She is silent. Then she says slowly: "Will 
you swear it?" "Yes." "By everything that is sacre
d to you?" Good God, what is there that is sacred 
to me?--such things change pretty quickly with us.
 "Yes, he died at once." "Are you willing never to
 come back yourself, if it isn't true?" "May I nev
er come back if he wasn't killed instantaneously."
 I would swear to anything. But she seems to belie
ve me. She moans and weeps steadily. I have to tel
l how it happened so I invent a story and I almost
 believe it myself. As I leave she kisses me and g
ives me a picture of him. In his recruit's uniform
 he leans on a round rustic table with legs made o
f birch branches. Behind him a wood is painted on 
a curtain, and on the table stands a mug of beer. 
* * It is the last evening at home. Everyone is si
lent. I go to bed early, I seize the pillow, press
 it against myself and bury my head in it. Who kno
ws if I will ever lie in a feather bed again? Late
 in the night my mother comes into my room. She th
inks I am asleep, and I pretend to be so. To talk,
 to stay awake with one another, it is too hard. S
he sits long into the night although she is in pai
n and often writhes. At last I can bear it no long
er, and pretend I have just wakened up. "Go and sl
eep, mother, you will catch cold here." "I can sle
ep enough later," she says. I sit up. "I don't go 
straight back to the front, mother. I have to do f
our weeks at the training camp. I may come over fr
om there one Sunday, perhaps." She is silent. Then
 she asks gently: "Are you very much afraid?" "No,
 mother." "I would like to tell you to be on your 
guard against the women out in France. They are no
 good." Ah! Mother, Mother! You still think I am a
 child--why can I not put my head in your lap and 
weep? Why have I always to be strong and self-cont
rolled? I would like to weep and be comforted, too
, indeed I am little more than a child; in the war
drobe still hang my short, boy's trousers--it is s
uch a little time ago, why is it over? "Where we a
re there aren't any women, mother," I say as calml
y as I can. "And be very careful at the front, Pau
l." Ah, Mother, Mother! Why do I not take you in m
y arms and die with you. What poor wretches we are
! "Yes, mother, I will." "I will pray for you ever
y day, Paul." Ah! Mother, Mother! Let us rise up a
nd go out, back through the years, where the burde
n of all this misery lies on us no more, back to y
ou and me alone, Mother! "Perhaps you can get a jo
b that is not so dangerous." "Yes, mother, perhaps
 I can get into the cook-house, that can easily be
 done." "You do it then, and if the others say any
thing----" "That won't worry me, mother----" She s
ighs. Her face is a white gleam in the darkness. "
Now you must go to sleep, mother." She does not re
ply. I get up and wrap my cover round her shoulder
s. She supports herself on my arm, she is in pain.
 And so I take her to her room. I stay with her a 
little while. "And you must get well again, mother
, before I come back." "Yes, yes, my child." "You 
ought not to send your things to me, mother. We ha
ve plenty to eat out there. You can make much bett
er use of them here." How destitute she lies there
 in her bed, she, that loves me more than all the 
world. As I am about to leave, she says hastily: "
I have two pairs of under-pants for you. They are 
all wool. They will keep you warm. You must not fo
rget to put them in your pack." Ah! Mother! I know
 what these underpants have cost you in waiting, a
nd walking, and begging! Ah! Mother, Mother! how c
an it be that I must part from you? Who else is th
ere that has any claim on me but you. Here I sit a
nd there you are lying, and we have so much to say
, that we could never say it. "Good-night, mother.
" "Good-night, my child." The room is dark. I hear
 my mother's breathing, and the ticking of the clo
ck. Outside the window the wind blows and the ches
tnut trees rustle. On the landing I stumble over m
y pack which lies there already made up, because I
 have to leave early in the morning. I bite into m
y pillow. I grasp the iron rods of my bed with my 
fists. I ought never to have come here. Out there 
I was indifferent and often hopeless;--I will neve
r be able to be so again. I was a soldier, and now
 I am nothing but an agony for myself, for my moth
er, for everything that is so comfortless and with
out end. I ought never to have come on leave. CHAP
TER VIII I already know the camp on the moors. It 
was here that Himmelstoss gave Tjaden his educatio
n. But now I know hardly anyone here; as ever, all
 is altered. There are only a few people that I ha
ve occasionally met before. I go through the routi
ne mechanically. In the evenings I generally go to
 the Soldiers' Home, where the newspapers are laid
 out, but which I do not read; still, there is a p
iano there that I am glad enough to play on. Two g
irls are in attendance, one of them is young. The 
camp is surrounded with high barbed-wire fences. I
f we come back late from the Soldiers' Home we hav
e to show passes. But those who are on good terms 
with the guard can get through, of course. Between
 the junipers and the birch trees on the moor we p
ractice company-drill each day. It is bearable if 
one expects nothing better. We advance at a run, f
ling ourselves down, and our panting breath moves 
the stalks of the grasses and the flowers of the h
eather to and fro. Looked at so closely one sees t
he fine sand is composed of millions of the tinies
t pebbles as clear as if they had been made in a l
aboratory It is strangely inviting to dig one's ha
nds into it. But most beautiful are the woods with
 their line of birch trees. Their colour changes w
ith every minute. Now the stems gleam purest white
, and between them airy and silken, hangs the past
el-green of the leaves; the next moment all change
s to an opalescent blue, as the shivering breezes 
pass down from the heights and touch the green lig
htly away; and again in one place it deepens almos
t to black as a cloud passes over the sun. And thi
s shadow moves like a ghost through the dim trunks
 and passes far out over the moor to the sky--then
 the birches stand out again like gay banners on w
hite poles, with their red and gold patches of aut
umn-tinted leaves. I often become so lost in the p
lay of soft light and transparent shadow, that I a
lmost fail to hear the commands. It is when one is
 alone that one begins to observe Nature and to lo
ve her. And here I have not much companionship, an
d do not even desire it. We are too little acquain
ted with one another to do more than joke a bit an
d play poker or nap in the evenings. Alongside our
 camp is the big Russian prison camp. It is separa
ted from us by a wire fence, but in spite of this 
the prisoners come across to us. They seem nervous
 and fearful, though most of them are big fellows 
with beards--they look like meek, scolded, St. Ber
nard dogs. They slink about our camp and pick over
 the garbage tins. One can imagine what they find 
there. With us food is pretty scarce and none too 
good at that--turnips cut into six pieces and boil
ed in water, and unwashed carrot tops;--mouldy pot
atoes are tit-bits, and the chief luxury is a thin
 rice soup in which float little bits of beef-sine
w, but these are cut up so small that they take a 
lot of finding. Everything gets eaten, notwithstan
ding, and if ever anyone is so well off as not to 
want all his share, there are a dozen others stand
ing by ready to relieve him of it. Only the dregs 
that the ladle cannot reach are tipped out and thr
own into the garbage tins. Along with that sometim
es go a few turnip peelings, mouldy bread crusts a
nd all kinds of muck. This thin, miserable, dirty 
garbage is the objective of the prisoners. They pi
ck it out of the stinking tins greedily and go off
 with it under their blouses. It is strange to see
 these enemies of ours so close up. They have face
s that make one think--honest peasant faces, broad
 foreheads, broad noses, broad mouths, broad hands
, and thick hair. They ought to be put to threshin
g, reaping, and apple picking. They look just as k
indly as our own peasants in Friesland. It is dist
ressing to watch their movements, to see them begg
ing for something to eat. They are all rather feeb
le, for they only get enough nourishment to keep t
hem from starving. Ourselves we have not had suffi
cient to eat for long enough. They have dysentery;
 furtively many of them display the blood-stained 
tails of their shirts. Their backs, their necks ar
e bent, their knees sag, their heads droop as they
 stretch out their hands and beg in the few words 
of German that they know--beg with those soft, dee
p, musical voices, that are like warm stoves and c
osy rooms at home. Some men there are who give the
m a kick, so that they fall over;--but those are n
ot many. The majority do nothing to them, just ign
ore them. Occasionally, when they are too grovelli
ng, it makes a man mad and then he kicks them. If 
only they would not look at one so-- What great mi
sery can be in two such small spots, no bigger tha
n a man's thumb--in their eyes! They come over to 
the camp in the evenings and trade. They exchange 
whatever they possess for bread. Often they have f
air success, because they have very good boots and
 ours are bad. The leather of their knee boots is 
wonderfully soft, like suede. The peasants among u
s who get tit bits sent from home can afford to tr
ade. The price of a pair of boots is about two or 
three loaves of army bread, or a loaf of bread and
 a small, tough ham sausage. But most of the Russi
ans have long since parted with whatever things th
ey had. Now they wear only the most pitiful clothi
ng, and try to exchange little carvings and object
s that they have made out of shell fragments and c
opper driving bands. Of course, they don't get muc
h for such things, though they may have taken imme
nse pains with them--they go for a slice or two of
 bread. Our peasants are hard and cunning when the
y bargain. They hold the piece of bread or sausage
 right under the nose of the Russian till he grows
 pale with greed and his eyes bulge and then he wi
ll give anything for it. The peasants wrap up thei
r booty with the utmost solemnity, and then get ou
t their big pocket knives, and slowly and delibera
tely cut off a slice of bread for themselves from 
their supply and with every mouthful take a piece 
of the good, tough sausage and so reward themselve
s with a good feed. It is distressing to watch the
m take their afternoon meal thus; one would like t
o crack them over their thick pates. They rarely g
ive anything away. How little we understand one an
other! * * I am often on guard over the Russians. 
In the darkness one sees their forms move like sic
k storks, like great birds. They come close up to 
the wire fence and lean their faces against it; th
eir fingers hook round the mesh. Often many stand 
side by side, and breathe the wind that comes down
 from the moors and the forest. They rarely speak 
and then only a few words. They are more human and
 more brotherly towards one another, it seems to m
e, than we are. But perhaps that is merely because
 they feel themselves to be more unfortunate than 
us. Anyway the war is over so far as they are conc
erned. But to wait for dysentery is not much of a 
life either. The Territorials who are in charge of
 them say that they were much more lively at first
. They used to have intrigues among themselves, as
 always happens, and it would often come to blows 
and knives. But now they are quite apathetic, and 
listless; most of them do not masturbate any more,
 they are so feeble, though occasionally it is so 
bad that they do it barracks fashion. They stand a
t the wire fence; sometimes one goes away and then
 another at once takes his place in the line. Most
 of them are silent; occasionally one begs a cigar
ette butt. I see their dark forms, their beards mo
ve in the wind. I know nothing of them except that
 they are prisoners, and that is exactly what trou
bles me. Their life is obscure and guiltless;--if 
I could know more of them, what their names are, h
ow they live, what they are waiting for, what are 
their burdens, then my emotion would have an objec
t and might become sympathy. But as it is I percei
ve behind them only the suffering of the creature,
 the awful melancholy of life and the pitilessness
 of men. A word of command has made these silent f
igures our enemies; a word of command might transf
orm them into our friends. At some table a documen
t is signed by some persons whom none of us knows,
 and then for years together that very crime on wh
ich formerly the world's condemnation and severest
 penalty fell, becomes our highest aim. But who ca
n draw such a distinction when he looks at these q
uiet men with their childlike faces and apostles' 
beards. Any non-commissioned officer is more of an
 enemy to a recruit, any schoolmaster to a pupil t
han they are to us. And yet we would shoot at them
 again and they at us if they were free. I am frig
htened: I dare think this way no more. This way li
es the abyss. It is not now the time; but I will n
ot lose these thoughts, I will keep them, shut the
m away until the war is ended. My heart beats fast
: this is the aim, the great, the sole aim, that I
 have thought of in the trenches; that I have look
ed for as the only possibility of existence after 
this annihilation of all human feeling; this is a 
task that will make life afterward worthy of these
 hideous years. I take out my cigarettes, break ea
ch one in half and give them to the Russians. They
 bow to me and then they light the cigarettes. Now
 red points glow in every face. They comfort me; i
t looks as though there were little windows in dar
k village cottages saying that behind them are roo
ms full of peace. * * The days go by. On a foggy m
orning another of the Russians is buried; almost e
very day one of them dies. I am on guard during th
e burial. The prisoners sing a chorale, they sing 
in parts, and it sounds almost as if there were no
 voices, but an organ far away on the moor. The bu
rial is quickly over. In the evening they stand ag
ain at the wire fence and the wind comes down to t
hem from the beech woods. The stars are cold. I no
w know a few of those who speak a little German. T
here is a musician amongst them, he says he used t
o be a violinist in Berlin. When he hears that I c
an play the piano he fetches his violin and plays.
 The others sit down and lean their backs against 
the fence. He stands up and plays, sometimes he ha
s that absent expression which violinists get when
 they close their eyes; or again he sways the inst
rument to the rhythm and smiles across to me. He p
lays mostly folk songs and the others hum with him
. They are like a country of dark hills that sing 
far down under the ground. The sound of the violin
 stands like a slender girl above it and is clear 
and alone. The voices cease and the violin continu
es alone. In the night it is so thin it sounds fro
zen; one must stand close up; it would be much bet
ter in a room;--out here it makes a man grow sad. 
* * Because I have already had a long leave I get 
none on Sundays. So the last Sunday before I go ba
ck to the front my father and eldest sister come o
ver to see me. All day we sit in the Soldiers' Hom
e. Where else could we go, we don't want to stay i
n the camp. About midday we go for a walk on the m
oors. The hours are a torture; we do not know what
 to talk about, so we speak of my mother's illness
. It is now definitely cancer, she is already in t
he hospital and will be operated on shortly. The d
octors hope she will recover, but we have never he
ard of cancer being cured. "Where is she then?" I 
ask. "In the Luisa Hospital," says my father. "In 
which class?" "Third. We must wait till we know wh
at the operation costs. She wanted to be in the th
ird herself. She said that then she would have som
e company. And besides it is cheaper." "So she is 
lying there with all those people. If only she cou
ld sleep properly." My father nods. His face is br
oken and full of furrows. My mother has always bee
n sickly; and though she has only gone to the hosp
ital when she has been compelled to, it has cost a
 great deal of money, and my father's life has bee
n practically given up to it. "If only I knew how 
much the operation costs," says he. "Have you not 
asked?" "Not directly, I cannot do that--the surge
on might take it amiss and that would not do, he m
ust operate on mother." Yes, I think bitterly, tha
t's how it is with us, and with all poor people. T
hey don't dare to ask the price, but worry themsel
ves dreadfully beforehand about it; but the others
, for whom it is not important, they settle the pr
ice first as a matter of course. And the doctor do
es not take it amiss from them. "And the dressings
 afterwards are so expensive," says my father. "Do
esn't the Invalid's Fund pay anything toward it, t
hen?" I ask. "Mother has been ill too long." "Have
 you any money at all?" He shakes his head: "No, b
ut I can do some overtime." I know. He will stand 
at his desk folding and pasting and cutting until 
twelve o'clock at night. At eight o'clock in the e
vening he will eat some of the miserable rubbish t
hey get in exchange for their food tickets, then h
e will take a powder for his headache and work on.
 In order to cheer him up a bit I tell him a few s
tories, soldiers' jokes, and the like, about gener
als and sergeant-majors. Afterwards I accompany th
em both to the railway station. They give me a pot
 of jam and a bag of potato-cakes that my mother h
as made for me. Then they go off and I return to t
he camp. In the evening I spread the jam on the ca
kes and eat some. But I have no taste for them. So
 I go out to give them to the Russians. Then it oc
curs to me that my mother cooked them herself and 
that she was probably in pain as she stood before 
the hot stove. I put the bag back in my pack and t
ake only two cakes to the Russians. CHAPTER IX We 
travel for several days. The first aeroplanes appe
ar in the sky. We roll on past transport lines. Gu
ns, guns. The light railway picks us up. I search 
for my regiment. No one knows exactly where it lie
s. Somewhere or other I put up for the night, some
where or other I receive provisions and a few vagu
e instructions. And so with my pack and my rifle I
 set out again on the way. By the time I come up t
hey are no longer in that devastated place. I hear
 we have become one of the flying divisions that a
re pushed in wherever it is hottest. That does not
 sound cheerful to me. They tell me of heavy losse
s that we have been having. I inquire after Kat an
d Albert. No one knows anything of them. I search 
farther and wander about here and there; it is a w
onderful feeling. One night and then another I cam
p out like a Red Indian. Then at last I get some d
efinite information, and by the afternoon I am abl
e to report to the Orderly Room. The sergeant-majo
r detains me there. The company comes back in two 
days' time. There is no object in sending me up no
w. "What was it like on leave?" he asks, "pretty g
ood, eh?" "In parts," I say. "Yes," he sighs, "yes
, if a man didn't have to come away again. The sec
ond half is always rather messed up by that." I lo
af around until the company comes back in the earl
y morning, grey, dirty, soured, and gloomy. Then I
 jump up, push in amongst them, my eyes searching.
 There is Tjaden, there is Müller blowing his nose
, and there are Kat and Kropp. We arrange our sack
s of straw side by side. I have an uneasy conscien
ce when I look at them, and yet without any good r
eason. Before we turn in I bring out the rest of t
he potato-cakes and jam so that they can have some
 too. The two outer cakes are mouldy, still it is 
possible to eat them. I keep those for myself and 
give the fresh ones to Kat and Kropp. Kat chews an
d says: "These are from your mother?" I nod. "Good
," says he, "I can tell by the taste." I could alm
ost weep. I can hardly control myself any longer. 
But it will soon be all right again back here with
 Kat and Albert. This is where I belong. "You've b
een lucky," whispers Kropp to me before we drop of
f to sleep, "they say we are going to Russia." To 
Russia. It's not much of a war over there. In the 
distance the front thunders. The walls of the hut 
rattle. * * There's a great deal of polishing bein
g done. We are inspected at every turn. Everything
 that is torn is exchanged for new. I score a spot
less new tunic out of it and Kat, of course, an en
tire outfit. A rumour is going round that there ma
y be peace, but the other story is more likely--th
at we are bound for Russia. Still, what do we need
 new things for in Russia? At last it leaks out--t
he Kaiser is coming to review us. Hence all the in
spections. For eight whole days one would suppose 
we were in a base-camp, there is so much drill and
 fuss. Everyone is peevish and touchy, we do not t
ake kindly to all this polishing, much less to par
ades. Such things exasperate a soldier more than t
he front-line. At last the moment arrives. We stan
d up stiff and the Kaiser appears. We are curious 
to see what he looks like. He stalks along the lin
e, and I am really rather disappointed; judging fr
om his pictures I imagined him to be bigger and mo
re powerfully built, and above all to have a thund
ering voice. He distributes Iron Crosses and speak
s to this man and to that. Then we march off. Afte
rwards we discuss it. Tjaden says with astonishmen
t: "So that is the All-Highest! And everyone, bar 
nobody, has to stand up stiff in front of him!" He
 meditates: "Hindenburg too, he has to stand up st
iff to him, eh?" "Sure," says Kat. Tjaden hasn't f
inished yet. He thinks for a while and then asks: 
"And would a king have to stand up stiff to an emp
eror?" None of us is quite sure about it, but we d
on't suppose so. They are both so exalted that sta
nding strictly to attention is probably not insist
ed on. "What rot you do hatch out," says Kat. "The
 main point is that you have to stand stiff yourse
lf." But Tjaden is quite fascinated. His otherwise
 prosy fancy is blowing bubbles. "But look," he an
nounces, "I simply can't believe that an emperor h
as to go to the latrine the same as I have." "You 
can bet your boots on it." "Four and a half-wit ma
ke seven," says Kat. "You've got a maggot in your 
brain, Tjaden, just you run along to the latrine q
uick, and get your head clear, so that you don't t
alk like a two-year-old." Tjaden disappears. "But 
what I would like to know," says Albert, "is wheth
er there would not have been a war if the Kaiser h
ad said No." "I'm sure of this much," I interject,
 "he was against it from the first." "Well, if not
 him alone, then perhaps if twenty or thirty peopl
e in the world had said No." "That's probable," I 
agree, "but they damned well said Yes." "It's quee
r, when one thinks about it," goes on Kropp, "we a
re here to protect our fatherland. And the French 
are over there to protect their fatherland. Now, w
ho's in the right?" "Perhaps both," say I, without
 believing it. "Yes, well now," pursues Albert, an
d I see that he means to drive me into a corner, "
but our professors and parsons and newspapers say 
that we are the only ones that are right, and let'
s hope so;--but the French professors and parsons 
and newspapers say that the right is on their side
, now what about that?" "That I don't know," I say
, "but whichever way it is there's war all the sam
e and every month more countries coming in." Tjade
n reappears. He is still quite excited and again j
oins the conversation, wondering just how a war ge
ts started. "Mostly by one country badly offending
 another," answers Albert with a slight air of sup
eriority. Then Tjaden pretends to be obtuse. "A co
untry? I don't follow. A mountain in Germany canno
t offend a mountain in France. Or a river, or a wo
od, or a field of wheat." "Are you really as stupi
d as that, or are you just pulling my leg?" growls
 Kropp, "I don't mean that at all. One people offe
nds the other----" "Then I haven't any business he
re at all," replies Tjaden, "I don't feel myself o
ffended." "Well, let me tell you," says Albert sou
rly, "it doesn't apply to tramps like you." "Then 
I can be going home right away," retorts Tjaden, a
nd we all laugh. "Ach, man! he means the people as
 a whole, the State----" exclaims Müller. "State, 
State"--Tjaden snaps his fingers contemptuously, "
Gendarmes, police, taxes, that's your State;--if t
hat's what you are talking about, no thank you." "
That's right," says Kat, "you've said something fo
r once, Tjaden. State and home-country, there's a 
big difference." "But they go together," insists K
ropp, "without the State there wouldn't be any hom
e-country." "True, but just you consider, almost a
ll of us are simple folk. And in France, too, the 
majority of men are labourers, workmen, or poor cl
erks. Now just why would a French blacksmith or a 
French shoemaker want to attack us? No, it is mere
ly the rulers. I had never seen a Frenchman before
 I came here, and it will be just the same with th
e majority of Frenchmen as regards us. They weren'
t asked about it any more than we were." "Then wha
t exactly is the war for?" asks Tjaden. Kat shrugs
 his shoulders. "There must be some people to whom
 the war is useful." "Well, I'm not one of them," 
grins Tjaden. "Not you, nor anybody else here." "W
ho are they then?" persists Tjaden. "It isn't any 
use to the Kaiser either. He has everything he can
 want already." "I'm not so sure about that," cont
radicts Kat, "he has not had a war up till now. An
d every full-grown emperor requires at least one w
ar, otherwise he wouldn't become famous. You look 
in your school books." "And generals too," adds De
tering, "they become famous through war." "Even mo
re famous than emperors," adds Kat. "There are oth
er people back behind there who profit by the war,
 that's certain," growls Detering. "I think it is 
more a kind of fever," says Albert. "No one in par
ticular wants it, and then all at once there it is
. We didn't want the war, the others say the same 
thing--and yet half the world is in it all the sam
e." "But there are more lies told by the other sid
e than by us," say I; "just think of those pamphle
ts the prisoners have on them, where it says that 
we eat Belgian children. The fellows who write tha
t ought to go and hang themselves. They are the re
al culprits." Müller gets up. "Anyway, it is bette
r that the war is here instead of in Germany. Just
 you take a look at the shell-holes." "True," asse
nts Tjaden, "but no war at all would be better sti
ll." He is quite proud of himself because he has f
or once scored over us volunteers. And his opinion
 is quite typical here, one meets it time and agai
n, and there is nothing with which one can properl
y counter it, because that is the limit of their c
omprehension of the factors involved. The national
 feeling of the tommy resolves itself into this--h
ere he is. But that is the end of it; everything e
lse from joining up onwards he criticizes from a p
ractical point of view. Albert lies down on the gr
ass and growls angrily: "The best thing is not to 
talk about the rotten business." "It won't make an
y difference, that's sure," agrees Kat. As for the
 windfall, we have to return almost all the new th
ings and take back our old rags again. The good on
es were merely for the inspection. * * Instead of 
going to Russia, we go up the line again. On the w
ay we pass through a devastated wood with the tree
 trunks shattered and the ground ploughed up. At s
everal places there are tremendous craters. "Great
 guns, something's hit that," I say to Kat. "Trenc
h mortars," he replies, and then points up at one 
of the trees. In the branches dead men are hanging
. A naked soldier is squatting in the fork of a tr
ee, he still has his helmet on, otherwise he is en
tirely unclad. There is only half of him sitting u
p there, the top half, the legs are missing. "What
 can that mean?" I ask. "He's been blown out of hi
s clothes," mutters Tjaden. "It's funny," says Kat
, "we have seen that a couple of times now. If a m
ortar gets you it blows you almost clean out of yo
ur clothes. It's the concussion that does it." I s
earch around. And so it is. Here hang bits of unif
orm, and somewhere else is plastered a bloody mess
 that was once a human limb. Over there lies a bod
y with nothing but a piece of the underpants on on
e leg and the collar of the tunic around its neck.
 Otherwise it is naked and the clothes are hanging
 up in the tree. Both arms are missing as though t
hey had been pulled out. I discover one of them tw
enty yards off in a shrub. The dead man lies on hi
s face. There, where the arm wounds are, the earth
 is black with blood. Underfoot the leaves are scr
atched up as though the man had been kicking. "Tha
t's no joke, Kat," say I. "No more is a shell spli
nter in the belly," he replies, shrugging his shou
lders. "But don't get tender-hearted," says Tjaden
. All this can only have happened a little while a
go, the blood is still fresh. As everybody we see 
there is dead we do not waste any more time, but r
eport the affair at the next stretcher-bearers' po
st. After all it is not our business to take these
 stretcher-bearers' jobs away from them. * * A pat
rol has to be sent out to discover just how far th
e enemy position is advanced. Since my leave I fee
l a certain strange attachment to the other fellow
s, and so I volunteer to go with them. We agree on
 a plan, slip out through the wire and then divide
 and creep forward separately. After a while I fin
d a shallow shell-hole and crawl into it. From her
e I peer forward. There is moderate machine-gun fi
re. It sweeps across from all directions, not very
 heavy, but always sufficient to make one keep dow
n. A parachute star-shell opens out. The ground li
es stark in the pale light, and then the darkness 
shuts down again blacker than ever. In the trenche
s we were told there were black troops in front of
 us. That is nasty, it is hard to see them; they a
re very good at patrolling, too. And oddly enough 
they are often quite stupid; for instance, both Ka
t and Kropp were once able to shoot down a black e
nemy patrol because the fellows in their enthusias
m for cigarettes smoked while they were creeping a
bout. Kat and Albert had simply to aim at the glow
ing ends of the cigarettes. A bomb or something la
nds close beside me. I have not heard it coming an
d am terrified. At the same moment a senseless fea
r takes hold on me. Here I am alone and almost hel
pless in the dark--perhaps two other eyes have bee
n watching me for a long while from another shell-
hole in front of me, and a bomb lies ready to blow
 me to pieces. I try to pull myself together. It i
s not my first patrol and not a particularly risky
 one. But it is the first since my leave, and besi
des, the lie of the land is still rather strange t
o me. I tell myself that my alarm is absurd, that 
there is probably nothing at all there in the dark
ness watching me, because otherwise the missile wo
uld not have landed so flat. It is in vain. In whi
rling confusion my thoughts hum in my brain--I hea
r the warning voice of my mother, I see the Russia
ns with the flowing beards leaning against the wir
e fence, I have a bright picture of a canteen with
 stools, of a cinema in Valenciennes; tormented, t
errified, in my imagination I see the grey, impalp
able muzzle of a rifle which moves noiselessly bef
ore me whichever way I try to turn my head. The sw
eat breaks out from every pore. I still continue t
o lie in my shallow bowl. I look at the time; only
 a few minutes have passed. My forehead is wet, th
e sockets of my eyes are damp, my hands tremble, a
nd I am panting softly. It is nothing but an awful
 spasm of fear, a simple animal fear of poking out
 my head and crawling on farther. All my efforts s
ubside like froth into the one desire to be able j
ust to stay lying there. My limbs are glued to the
 earth. I make a vain attempt;--they refuse to com
e away. I press myself down on the earth, I cannot
 go forward, I make up my mind to stay lying there
. But immediately the wave floods over me anew, a 
mingled sense of shame, of remorse, and yet at the
 same time of security. I raise myself up a little
 to take a look around. My eyes burn with staring 
into the dark. A star-shell goes up;--I duck down 
again. I wage a wild and senseless fight, I want t
o get out of the hollow and yet slide back into it
 again, I say "You must, it is your comrades, it i
s not any idiotic command," and again: "What does 
it matter to me, I have only one life to lose----"
 That is the result of all this leave, I reproach 
myself bitterly. But I cannot convince myself, I b
ecome terribly faint. I raise myself slowly and re
ach forward with my arms, dragging my body after m
e and then lie on the edge of the shell-hole, half
 in and half out. There I hear sounds and drop bac
k. Suspicious sounds can be detected clearly despi
te the noise of the artillery-fire. I listen; the 
sound is behind me. They are our people moving alo
ng the trench. Now I hear muffled voices. To judge
 by the tone that might be Kat talking. At once a 
new warmth flows through me. These voices, these f
ew quiet words, these footsteps in the trench behi
nd me recall me at a bound from the terrible lonel
iness and fear of death by which I had been almost
 destroyed. They are more to me than life, these v
oices, they are more than motherliness and more th
an fear; they are the strongest, most comforting t
hing there is anywhere: they are the voices of my 
comrades. I am no longer a shuddering speck of exi
stence, alone in the darkness;--I belong to them a
nd they to me, we all share the same fear and the 
same life, we are nearer than lovers, in a simpler
, a harder way; I could bury my face in them, in t
hese voices, these words that have saved me and wi
ll stand by me. * * Cautiously I glide out over th
e edge and snake my way forward. I shuffle along o
n all fours a bit farther, I keep track of my bear
ings, look around me and observe the distribution 
of the gunfire so as to be able to find my way bac
k. Then I try to get in touch with the others. I a
m still afraid, but it is an intelligent fear, an 
extraordinarily heightened caution. The night is w
indy and shadows flit hither and thither in the fl
icker of the gunfire. It reveals too little and to
o much. Often I peer ahead, but always for nothing
. Thus I advance a long way and then turn back in 
a wide curve. I have not established touch with th
e others. Every yard nearer our trench fills me wi
th confidence;--and with haste, too. It would be b
ad to get lost now. Then a new fear lays hold of m
e. I can no longer remember the direction. Quiet, 
I squat in a shell-hole and try to locate myself. 
More than once it has happened that some fellow ha
s jumped joyfully into a trench only then to disco
ver that it was the wrong one. After a little time
 I listen again, but still I am not sure. The conf
usion of shell-holes now seems so bewildering that
 I can no longer tell in my agitation which way I 
should go. Perhaps I am crawling parallel to the l
ines, and that might go on for ever. So I crawl ro
und once again in a wide curve. These damned rocke
ts! They seem to burn for an hour, and a man canno
t make the least movement without bringing the bul
lets whistling round. But there is nothing for it,
 I must get out. Falteringly I work my way farther
, I move off over the ground like a crab and rip m
y hands sorely on the jagged splinters, as sharp a
s razor blades. Often I think that the sky is beco
ming lighter on the horizon, but it may be merely 
my imagination. Then gradually I realize that to c
rawl in the right direction is a matter of life or
 death. A shell crashes. Almost immediately two ot
hers. And then it begins in earnest. A bombardment
. Machine-guns rattle. Now there is nothing for it
 but to stay lying low. Apparently an attack is co
ming. Everywhere the rockets shoot up. Unceasing. 
I lie huddled in a large shell-hole, my legs in th
e water up to the belly. When the attack starts I 
will let myself fall into the water, with my face 
as deep in the mud as I can keep it without suffoc
ating. I must pretend to be dead. Suddenly I hear 
the barrage lift. At once I slip down into the wat
er, my helmet on the nape of my neck and my mouth 
just clear so that I can get a breath of air. I li
e motionless;--somewhere something clanks, it stam
ps and stumbles nearer--all my nerves become taut 
and icy. It clatters over me and away, the first w
ave has passed. I have but this one shattering tho
ught: What will you do if someone jumps into your 
shell-hole?-- Swiftly I pull out my little dagger,
 grasp it fast and bury it in my hand once again u
nder the mud. If anyone jumps in here I will go fo
r him; it hammers in my forehead; at once, stab hi
m clean through the throat, so that he cannot call
 out; that's the only way; he will be just as frig
htened as I am, when in terror we fall upon one an
other, then I must be first. Now our batteries are
 firing. A shell lands near me. That makes me sava
ge with fury, all it needs now is to be killed by 
our own shells; I curse and grind my teeth in the 
mud; it is a raving frenzy; in the end all I can d
o is groan and pray. The crash of the shells burst
s in my ears. If our fellows make a counter-raid I
 will be saved. I press my head against the earth 
and listen to the muffled thunder, like the explos
ions of quarrying--and raise it again to listen fo
r the sounds on top. The machine-guns rattle. I kn
ow our barbed wire entanglements are strong and al
most undamaged;--parts of them are charged with a 
powerful electric current. The rifle fire increase
s. They have not broken through; they have to retr
eat. I sink down again, huddled, strained to the u
ttermost. The banging, the creeping, the clanging 
becomes audible. One single cry yelling amongst it
 all. They are raked with fire, the attack is repu
lsed. * * Already it has become somewhat lighter. 
Steps hasten over me. The first. Gone. Again, anot
her. The rattle of machine-guns becomes an unbroke
n chain. Just as I am about to turn round a little
, something heavy stumbles, and with a crash a bod
y falls over me into the shell-hole, slips down, a
nd lies across me---- I do not think at all, I mak
e no decision--I strike madly home, and feel only 
how the body suddenly convulses, then becomes limp
, and collapses. When I recover myself, my hand is
 sticky and wet. The man gurgles. It sounds to me 
as though he bellows, every gasping breath is like
 a cry, a thunder--but it is only my heart poundin
g. I want to stop his mouth, stuff it with earth, 
stab him again, he must be quiet, he is betraying 
me; now at last I regain control of myself, but ha
ve suddenly become so feeble that I cannot any mor
e lift my hand against him. So I crawl away to the
 farthest corner and stay there, my eyes glued on 
him, my hand grasping the knife--ready, if he stir
s, to spring at him again. But he won't do so any 
more, I can hear that already in his gurgling. I c
an see him indistinctly. I have but one desire, to
 get away. If it is not soon it will be too light;
 it will be difficult enough now. Then as I try to
 raise up my head I see it is impossible already. 
The machine-gun fire so sweeps the ground that I w
ould be shot through and through before I could ma
ke one jump. I test it once with my helmet, which 
I take off and hold up to find out the level of th
e shots. The next moment it is knocked out of my h
and by a bullet. The fire is sweeping very low ove
r the ground. I am not far enough from the enemy l
ine to escape being picked off by one of the snipe
rs if I attempt to get away. The light increases. 
Burning I wait for our attack. My hands are white 
at the knuckles, I clench them so tightly in my lo
nging for the fire to cease so that my comrades ma
y come. Minute after minute trickles away. I dare 
not look again at the dark figure in the shell-hol
e. With an effort I look past it and wait, wait. T
he bullets hiss, they make a steel net, never ceas
ing, never ceasing. Then I notice my bloody hand a
nd suddenly feel nauseated. I take some earth and 
rub the skin with it, now my hand is muddy and the
 blood cannot be seen any more. The fire does not 
diminish. It is equally heavy from both sides. Our
 fellows have probably given me up for lost long a
go. * * It is early morning, clear and grey. The g
urgling continues, I stop my ears, but soon take m
y fingers away again, because then I cannot hear t
he other sound. The figure opposite me moves. I sh
rink together and involuntarily look at it. Then m
y eyes remain glued to it. A man with a small poin
ted beard lies there, his head is fallen to one si
de, one arm is half-bent, his head rests helplessl
y upon it. The other hand lies on his chest, it is
 bloody. He is dead, I say to myself, he must be d
ead, he doesn't feel anything any more; it is only
 the body that is gurgling there. Then the head tr
ies to raise itself, for a moment the groaning bec
omes louder, his forehead sinks back upon his arm.
 The man is not dead, he is dying, but he is not d
ead. I drag myself toward him, hesitate, support m
yself on my hands, creep a bit farther, wait, agai
n a terrible journey of three yards, a long, a ter
rible journey. At last I am beside him. Then he op
ens his eyes. He must have heard me and gazes at m
e with a look of utter terror. The body lies still
, but in the eyes there is such an extraordinary e
xpression of flight that for a moment I think they
 have power enough to carry the body off with them
. Hundreds of miles away with one bound. The body 
is still, perfectly still, without sound, the gurg
le has ceased, but the eyes cry out, yell, all the
 life is gathered together in them for one tremend
ous effort to flee, gathered together there in a d
readful terror of death, of me. My legs give way a
nd I drop on my elbows. "No, no," I whisper. The e
yes follow me. I am powerless to move so long as t
hey are there. Then his hand slips slowly from his
 breast, only a little bit, it sinks just a few in
ches, but this movement breaks the power of the ey
es. I bend forward, shake my head and whisper: "No
, no, no," I raise one hand, I must show him that 
I want to help him, I stroke his forehead. The eye
s shrink back as the hand comes, then they lose th
eir stare, the eyelids droop lower, the tension is
 past. I open his collar and place his head more c
omfortably upright. His mouth stands half open, it
 tries to form words. The lips are dry. My water b
ottle is not there. I have not brought it with me.
 But there is water in the mud, down at the bottom
 of the crater. I climb down, take out my handkerc
hief, spread it out, push it under and scoop up th
e yellow water that strains through into the hollo
w of my hand. He gulps it down. I fetch some more.
 Then I unbutton his tunic in order to bandage him
 if it is possible. In any case I must do it, so t
hat if the fellows over there capture me they will
 see that I wanted to help him, and so will not sh
oot me. He tries to resist, but his hand is too fe
eble. The shirt is stuck and will not come away, i
t is buttoned at the back. So there is nothing for
 it but to cut it off. I look for the knife and fi
nd it again. But when I begin to cut the shirt the
 eyes open once more and the cry is in them again 
and the demented expression, so that I must close 
them, press them shut and whisper: "I want to help
 you, Comrade, camerade, camerade, camerade----" e
agerly repeating the word, to make him understand.
 There are three stabs. My field dressing covers t
hem, the blood runs out under it, I press it tight
er; there; he groans. That is all I can do. Now we
 must wait, wait. * * These hours.... The gurgling
 starts again--but how slowly a man dies! For this
 I know--he cannot be saved. Indeed, I have tried 
to tell myself that he will be, but at noon this p
retence breaks down and melts before his groans. I
f only I had not lost my revolver crawling about, 
I would shoot him. Stab him I cannot. By noon I am
 groping on the outer limits of reason. Hunger dev
ours me, I could almost weep for something to eat,
 I cannot struggle against it. Again and again I f
etch water for the dying man and drink some myself
. This is the first man I have killed with my hand
s, whom I can see close at hand, whose death is my
 doing. Kat and Kropp and Müller have experienced 
it already, when they have hit someone; it happens
 to many, in hand-to-hand fighting especially-- Bu
t every gasp lays my heart bare. This dying man ha
s time with him, he has an invisible dagger with w
hich he stabs me: Time and my thoughts. I would gi
ve much if he would but stay alive. It is hard to 
lie here and to have to see and hear him. In the a
fternoon, about three, he is dead. I breathe freel
y again. But only for a short time. Soon the silen
ce is more unbearable than the groans. I wish the 
gurgling were there again, gasping, hoarse, now wh
istling softly and again hoarse and loud. It is ma
d, what I do. But I must do something. I prop the 
dead man up again so that he lies comfortably alth
ough he feels nothing any more. I close his eyes. 
They are brown, his hair is black and a bit curly 
at the sides. The mouth is full and soft beneath h
is moustache; the nose is slightly arched, the ski
n brownish; it is now not so pale as it was before
, when he was still alive. For a moment the face s
eems almost healthy;--then it collapses suddenly i
nto the strange face of the dead that I have so of
ten seen, strange faces, all alike. No doubt his w
ife still thinks of him; she does not know what ha
s happened. He looks as if he would often have wri
tten to her;--she will still be getting mail from 
him--To-morrow, in a week's time--perhaps even a s
tray letter a month hence. She will read it, and i
n it he will be speaking to her. My state is getti
ng worse, I can no longer control my thoughts. Wha
t would his wife look like? Like the little brunet
te on the other side of the canal? Does she belong
 to me now? Perhaps by this act she becomes mine. 
I wish Kantorek were sitting here beside me. If my
 mother could see me----. The dead man might have 
had thirty more years of life if only I had impres
sed the way back to our trench more sharply on my 
memory. If only he had run two yards farther to th
e left, he might now be sitting in the trench over
 there and writing a fresh letter to his wife. But
 I will get no further that way; for that is the f
ate of all of us: if Kemmerich's leg had been six 
inches to the right; if Haie Westhus had bent his 
back three inches further forward---- * * The sile
nce spreads. I talk and must talk. So I speak to h
im and say to him: "Comrade, I did not want to kil
l you. If you jumped in here again, I would not do
 it, if you would be sensible too. But you were on
ly an idea to me before, an abstraction that lived
 in my mind and called forth its appropriate respo
nse. It was that abstraction I stabbed. But now, f
or the first time, I see you are a man like me. I 
thought of your hand-grenades, of your bayonet, of
 your rifle; now I see your wife and your face and
 our fellowship. Forgive me, comrade. We always se
e it too late. Why do they never tell us that you 
are just poor devils like us, that your mothers ar
e just as anxious as ours, and that we have the sa
me fear of death, and the same dying and the same 
agony--. Forgive me, comrade; how could you be my 
enemy? If we threw away these rifles and this unif
orm you could be my brother just like Kat and Albe
rt. Take twenty years of my life, comrade, and sta
nd up--take more, for I do not know what I can eve
n attempt to do with it now." It is quiet, the fro
nt is still except for the crackle of rifle fire. 
The bullets rain over, they are not fired haphazar
d, but shrewdly aimed from all sides. I cannot get
 out. "I will write to your wife," I say hastily t
o the dead man, "I will write to her, she must hea
r it from me, I will tell her everything I have to
ld you, she shall not suffer, I will help her, and
 your parents too, and your child----" His tunic i
s half open. The pocket-book is easy to find. But 
I hesitate to open it. In it is the book with his 
name. So long as I do not know his name perhaps I 
may still forget him, time will obliterate it, thi
s picture. But his name, it is a nail that will be
 hammered into me and never come out again. It has
 the power to recall this for ever, it will always
 come back and stand before me. Irresolutely I tak
e the wallet in my hand. It slips out of my hand a
nd falls open. Some pictures and letters drop out.
 I gather them up and want to put them back again,
 but the strain I am under, the uncertainty, the h
unger, the danger, these hours with the dead man h
ave confused me, I want to hasten the relief, to i
ntensify and to end the torture, as one strikes an
 unendurably painful hand against the trunk of a t
ree, regardless of everything. There are portraits
 of a woman and a little girl, small amateur photo
graphs taken against an ivy-clad wall. Along with 
them are letters. I take them out and try to read 
them. Most of it I do not understand, it is so har
d to decipher and I know scarcely any French. But 
each word I translate pierces me like a shot in th
e chest;--like a stab in the chest. My brain is ta
xed beyond endurance. But I realize this much, tha
t I will never dare to write to these people as I 
intended. Impossible. I look at the portraits once
 more; they are clearly not rich people. I might s
end them money anonymously if I earn anything late
r on. I seize upon that, it is at least something 
to hold on to. This dead man is bound up with my l
ife, therefore I must do everything, promise every
thing, in order to save myself; I swear blindly th
at I mean to live only for his sake and his family
, with wet lips I try to placate him--and deep dow
n in me lies the hope that I may buy myself off in
 this way and perhaps even yet get out of this; it
 is a little stratagem: if only I am allowed to es
cape, then I will see to it. So I open the book an
d read slowly:--Gerard Duval, compositor. With the
 dead man's pencil I write the address on an envel
ope, then swiftly thrust everything back into his 
tunic. I have killed the printer, Gerard Duval. I 
must be a printer, I think confusedly, be a printe
r, printer---- * * By afternoon I am calmer. My fe
ar was groundless. The name troubles me no more. T
he madness passes. "Comrade," I say to the dead ma
n, but I say it calmly, "To-day you, to-morrow me.
 But if I come out of it, comrade, I will fight ag
ainst this, that has struck us both down; from you
, taken life--and from me--? Life also. I promise 
you, comrade. It shall never happen again." The su
n strikes low. I am stupefied with exhaustion and 
hunger. Yesterday is like a fog to me, there is no
 hope of getting out of this yet. I fall into a do
ze and do not at first realize that evening is app
roaching. The twilight comes. It seems to me to co
me quickly now. One hour more. If it were summer, 
it would be three hours more. One hour more. Now s
uddenly I begin to tremble; something might happen
 in the interval. I think no more of the dead man,
 he is of no consequence to me now. With one bound
 the lust to live flares up again and everything t
hat has filled my thoughts goes down before it. No
w, merely to avert any ill-luck, I babble mechanic
ally: "I will fulfil everything, fulfil everything
 I have promised you----" but already I know that 
I shall not do so. Suddenly it occurs to me that m
y own comrades may fire on me as I creep up; they 
do not know I am coming. I will call out as soon a
s I can so that they will recognize me. I will sta
y lying in front of the trench until they answer m
e. The first star. The front remains quiet. I brea
the deeply and talk to myself in my excitement: "N
o foolishness now, Paul--Quiet, Paul, quiet--then 
you will be saved, Paul." When I use my Christian 
name it works as though someone else spoke to me, 
it has more power. The darkness grows. My exciteme
nt subsides, I wait cautiously until the first roc
ket goes up. Then I crawl out of the shell-hole. I
 have forgotten the dead man. Before me lies the o
n-coming night and the pale gleaming field. I fix 
my eye on a shell-hole; the moment the light dies 
I scurry over into it, grope farther, spring into 
the next, duck down, scramble onward. I come neare
r. There, by the light of a rocket I see something
 move in the wire, then it stiffens and lies still
. Next time I see it again, yes, they are men from
 our trench. But I am suspicious until I recognize
 our helmets. Then I call. And immediately an answ
er rings out, my name: "Paul--Paul----" I call aga
in in answer. It is Kat and Albert who have come o
ut with a stretcher to look for me. "Are you wound
ed?" "No, no----" We drop into the trench. I ask f
or something to eat and wolf it down. Müller gives
 me a cigarette. In a few words I tell what happen
ed. There is nothing new about it; it happens quit
e often. The night attack is the only unusual feat
ure of the business. In Russia Kat once lay for tw
o days behind the enemy lines before he could make
 his way back. I do not mention the dead printer. 
But by next morning I can keep it to myself no lon
ger. I must tell Kat and Albert. They both try to 
calm me. "You can't do anything about it. What els
e could you have done? That is what you are here f
or." I listen to them and feel comforted, reassure
d by their presence. It was mere drivelling nonsen
se that I talked out there in the shell-hole. "Loo
k there for instance," points Kat. On the fire-ste
p stand some snipers. They rest their rifles with 
telescopic sights on the parapet and watch the ene
my front. Once and again a shot cracks out. Then w
e hear the cry: "That's found a billet!" "Did you 
see how he leapt in the air?" Sergeant Oellrich tu
rns round proudly and scores his point. He heads t
he shooting list for to-day with three unquestiona
ble hits. "What do you say to that?" asks Kat. I n
od. "If he keeps that up he will get a little colo
ured bird for his buttonhole by this evening," say
s Albert. "Or rather he will soon be made acting-s
ergeant-major," says Kat. We look at one another. 
"I would not do it," I say. "All the same," says K
at, "it's very good for you to see it just now." S
ergeant Oellrich returns to the fire-step. The muz
zle of his rifle searches to and fro. "You don't n
eed to lose any more sleep over your affair," nods
 Albert. And now I hardly understand it myself any
 more. "It was only because I had to lie there wit
h him so long," I say. "After all, war is war." Oe
llrich's rifle cracks out sharp and dry. CHAPTER X
 We have dropped in for a good job. Eight of us ha
ve to guard a village that has been abandoned beca
use it is being shelled too heavily. In particular
 we have to watch the supply dump as that is not y
et empty. We are supposed to provision ourselves f
rom the same store. We are just the right people f
or that;--Kat, Albert, Müller, Tjaden, Detering, o
ur whole gang is there. Haie is dead, though. But 
we are mighty lucky all the same, all the other sq
uads have had more casualties than we have. We sel
ect, as a dug-out, a reinforced concrete cellar in
to which steps lead down from above. The entrance 
is protected by a separate concrete wall. Now we d
evelop an immense industry. This is an opportunity
 not only to stretch one's legs, but to stretch on
e's soul also. We make the best use of such opport
unities. The war is too desperate to allow us to b
e sentimental for long. That is only possible so l
ong as things are not going too badly. After all, 
we cannot afford to be anything but matter-of-fact
. So matter-of-fact, indeed, that I often shudder 
when a thought from the days before the war comes 
momentarily into my head. But it does not stay lon
g. We have to take things as lightly as we can, so
 we make the most of every opportunity, and nonsen
se stands stark and immediate beside horror. It ca
nnot be otherwise, that is how we hearten ourselve
s. So we zealously set to work to create an idyll-
-an idyll of eating and sleeping, of course. The f
loor is first covered with mattresses which we hau
l in from the houses. Even a soldier's behind like
s to sit soft. Only in the middle of the floor is 
there any clear space. Then we furnish ourselves w
ith blankets and eiderdowns, luxurious soft affair
s. There is plenty of everything to be had in the 
town. Albert and I find a mahogany bed which can b
e taken to pieces, with a sky of blue silk and a l
ace coverlet. We sweat like monkeys moving it in, 
but a man cannot let a thing like that slip, and i
t would certainly be shot to pieces in a day or tw
o. Kat and I do a little patrolling through the ho
uses. In very short time we have collected a dozen
 eggs and two pounds of fairly fresh butter. Sudde
nly there is a crash in the drawing room, and an i
ron stove hurtles through the wall past us and on,
 a yard from us out through the wall behind. Two h
oles. It comes from the house opposite where a she
ll has just landed. "The swine," grimaces Kat, and
 we continue our search. All at once we prick up o
ur ears, hurry across, and suddenly stand petrifie
d--there running up and down in a little sty are t
wo live sucking pigs. We rub our eyes and look onc
e again to make certain. Yes, they are still there
. We seize hold of them--no doubt about it, two re
al young pigs. This will make a grand feed. About 
twenty yards from our dug-out there is a small hou
se that was used as an officers' billet. In the ki
tchen is an immense fireplace with two ranges, pot
s, pans, and kettles--everything, even to a stack 
of small chopped wood in an outhouse--a regular co
ok's paradise. Two of our fellows have been out in
 the fields all the morning hunting for potatoes, 
carrots, and green peas. We are quite uppish and s
niff at the tinned stuff in the supply dump, we wa
nt fresh vegetables. In the dining-room there are 
already two heads of cauliflower. The sucking pigs
 are slaughtered. Kat sees to them. We want to mak
e potato cakes to go with the roast. But we cannot
 find a grater for the potatoes. However, that dif
ficulty is soon got over. With a nail we punch a l
ot of holes in a pot lid and there we have a grate
r. Three fellows put on thick gloves to protect th
eir fingers against the grater, two others peel th
e potatoes, and the business gets going. Kat sampl
es the sucking pigs, the carrots, the peas, and th
e cauliflower. He even mixes a white sauce for the
 cauliflower. I fry the pancakes, four at a time. 
After ten minutes I get the knack of tossing the p
an so that the pancakes which are done on the one 
side sail up, turn in the air and are caught again
 as they come down. The sucking pigs are baked who
le. We all stand round them as before an altar. In
 the meantime we receive visitors, a couple of wir
eless-men, who are generously invited to the feed.
 They sit in the living-room where there is a pian
o. One of them plays, the other sings 'An der Wese
r.' He sings feelingly, but with a rather Saxon ac
cent. All the same it moves us as we stand at the 
fireplace preparing the good things. Then we begin
 to realize that we are in for trouble. The observ
ation balloons have spotted the smoke from our chi
mney, and the shells start to drop on us. They are
 those damned spraying little daisy-cutters that m
ake only a small hole and scatter widely close to 
the ground. They keep dropping closer and closer a
ll round us; still we cannot leave the grub in the
 lurch. A couple of splinters whizz through the to
p of the kitchen window. The roast is already cook
ed. But frying the pancakes is getting difficult. 
The explosions come so fast that the splinters str
ike often and oftener against the wall of the hous
e and sweep in through the window. Whenever I hear
 a shell coming I drop down on one knee with the p
an and the pancakes, and duck behind the wall of t
he window. Immediately afterwards I am up again an
d going on with the frying. The Saxons stop singin
g--a fragment has smashed into the piano. At last 
everything is ready and we organize the transport 
of it back to the dug-out. After the next explosio
n two men dash across the fifty yards to the dug-o
ut with the pots of vegetables. We see them disapp
ear. The next shot. Everyone ducks and then two mo
re trot off, each with a big can of finest grade c
offee, and reach the dug-out before the next explo
sion. Then Kat and Kropp seize the masterpiece--th
e big dish with the brown, roasted sucking pigs. A
 screech, a knee bend, and away they race over the
 fifty yards of open country. I stay to finish fry
ing my last four pancakes; twice I have to drop on
 the floor;--after all, it means four pancakes mor
e, and they are my favourite dish. Then I grab the
 plate with the great pile of cakes and squeeze my
self behind the house door. A hiss, a crash, and I
 gallop off with the plate clamped against my ches
t with both hands. I am almost in, I run like a de
er, sweep round the wall, fragments clatter agains
t the concrete, I tumble down the cellar steps, my
 elbows are skinned, but I have not lost a single 
pancake, nor even broken the plate. About two o'cl
ock we start the meal. It lasts till six. We drink
 coffee until half-past seven--officers' coffee fr
om the supply dump--and smoke officers' cigars and
 cigarettes--also from the supply dump. Punctually
 at half-past seven we begin the evening meal. Abo
ut ten o'clock we throw the bones of the sucking p
igs outside the door. Then there is cognac and rum
--also from the blessed supply dump--and once agai
n long, fat cigars with belly-bands. Tjaden sugges
ts that it lacks only one thing: Girls from an off
icers' brothel. Late in the evening we hear mewing
. A little grey cat sits in the entrance. We entic
e it in and give it something to eat. And that wak
es up our own appetites once more. Still chewing, 
we lie down to sleep. But the night is bad. We hav
e eaten too much fat. Fresh baby pig is very gripi
ng to the bowels. There is an everlasting coming a
nd going in the dug-out. Two, three men with their
 pants down are always sitting about outside and c
ursing. I have been out nine times myself. About f
our o'clock in the morning we reach a record: all 
eleven men, guards and visitors, are squatting out
side. Burning houses stand out like torches agains
t the night. Shells lumber across and crash down. 
Munition columns tear along the street. On one sid
e the supply dump has been ripped open. In spite o
f all the flying fragments the drivers of the muni
tion columns pour in like a swarm of bees and poun
ce on the bread. We let them have their own way. I
f we said anything it would only mean a good hidin
g for us. So we go differently about it. We explai
n that we are the guard and so know our way about,
 we get hold of the tinned stuff and exchange it f
or things we are short of. What does it matter any
how--in a while it will all be blown to pieces. Fo
r ourselves we take some chocolate from the depot 
and eat it in slabs. Kat says it is good for loose
 bowels. Almost a fortnight passes thus in eating,
 drinking, and roaming about. No one disturbs us. 
The town gradually vanishes under the shells and w
e lead a charmed life. So long as any part of the 
supply dump still stands we don't worry, we desire
 nothing better than to stay here till the end of 
the war. Tjaden has become so fastidious that he o
nly half smokes his cigars. With his nose in the a
ir he explains to us that he was brought up that w
ay. And Kat is most cheerful. In the morning his f
irst call is: "Emil, bring in the caviare and coff
ee." We put on extraordinary airs, every man treat
s the other as his valet, bounces him and gives hi
m orders. "There is something itching under my foo
t; Kropp, my man, catch that louse at once," says 
Leer, poking out his leg at him like a ballet girl
, and Albert drags him up the stairs by the foot. 
"Tjaden!"--"What?"--"Stand at ease, Tjaden; and wh
at's more, don't say 'What,' say 'Yes, Sir,'--now:
 Tjaden!" Tjaden retorts in the well-known phrase 
from Goethe's "Götz von Berlichingen," with which 
he is always very free. After eight more days we r
eceive orders to go back. The palmy days are over.
 Two big motor lorries take us away. They are stac
ked high with planks. Nevertheless, Albert and I e
rect on top our four-poster bed complete with blue
 silk canopy, mattress, and two lace coverlets. An
d behind it at the head is stowed a bag full of ch
oice edibles. We often dip into it, and the tough 
ham sausages, the tins of liver sausages, the cons
erves, the boxes of cigarettes rejoice our hearts.
 Each man has a bag to himself. Kropp and I have r
escued two big red armchairs as well. They stand i
nside the bed, and we sprawl back in them as in a 
theatre box. Above us swells the silken cover like
 a baldaquin. Each man has a long cigar in his mou
th. And thus from aloft we survey the scene. Betwe
en us stands a parrot-cage that we found for the c
at. She is coming with us, and lies in the cage be
fore her saucer of meat, and purrs. Slowly the lor
ries roll down the road. We sing. Behind us the sh
ells are sending up fountains from the now utterly
 abandoned town. * * A few days later we are sent 
out to evacuate a village. On the way we meet the 
fleeing inhabitants trundling their goods and chat
tels along with them in wheel-barrows, perambulato
rs, and on their backs. Their figures are bent, th
eir faces full of grief, despair, haste, and resig
nation. The children hold on to their mothers' han
ds, and often an older girl leads the little ones 
who stumble onward and are for ever looking back. 
A few carry miserable-looking dolls. All are silen
t as they pass us by. We are marching in column; t
he French do not fire on a town in which there are
 still inhabitants. But a few minutes later the ai
r screams, the earth heaves, cries ring out; a she
ll has landed among the rear squad. We scatter and
 fling ourselves down on the ground, but at that m
oment I feel the instinctive alertness leave me wh
ich hitherto has always made me do unconsciously t
he right thing under fire; the thought leaps up wi
th a terrible, throttling fear: "You are lost"--an
d the next moment a blow sweeps like a whip over m
y left leg. I hear Albert cry out; he is beside me
. "Quick, up, Albert!" I yell, for we are lying un
sheltered in the open field. He staggers up and ru
ns. I keep beside him. We have to get over a hedge
; it is higher than we are. Kropp seizes a branch,
 I heave him up by the leg, he cries out, I give h
im a swing and he flies over. With one leap I foll
ow him and fall into a ditch that lies behind the 
hedge. Our faces are smothered with duck-weed and 
mud, but the cover is good. So we wade in up to ou
r necks. Whenever a shell whistles we duck our hea
ds under the water. After we have done this a doze
n times, I am exhausted. "Let's get away, or I'll 
fall in and drown," groans Albert. "Where has it g
ot you?" I ask him. "In the knee, I think." "Can y
ou run?" "I think----" "Then out!" We make for the
 ditch beside the road, and stooping, run along it
. The shelling follows us. The road leads toward t
he munition dump. If that goes up there won't be a
 man of us with his head left on his shoulders. So
 we change our plan and run diagonally across coun
try. Albert begins to drag. "You go, I'll come on 
after," he says, and throws himself down. I seize 
him by the arm and shake him. "Up, Albert, if once
 you lie down you'll never get any farther. Quick,
 I'll hold you up." At last we reach a small dug-o
ut. Kropp pitches in and I bandage him up. The sho
t is just a little above his knee. Then I take a l
ook at myself. My trousers are bloody and my arm, 
too. Albert binds up my wounds with his field dres
sing. Already he is no longer able to move his leg
, and we both wonder how we managed to get this fa
r. Fear alone made it possible; we would have run 
even if our feet had been shot off;--we would have
 run on the stumps. I can still crawl a little. I 
call out to a passing ambulance wagon which picks 
us up. It is full of wounded. There is an army med
ical lance-corporal with it who sticks an anti-tet
anus needle into our chests. At the dressing stati
on we arrange matters so that we lie side by side.
 They give us a thin soup which we spoon down gree
dily and scornfully, because we are accustomed to 
better times but are hungry all the same. "Now for
 home, Albert," I say. "Let's hope so," he replies
, "I only wish I knew what I've got." The pain inc
reases. The bandages burn like fire. We drink and 
drink, one glass of water after another. "How far 
above the knee am I hit?" asks Kropp. "At least fo
ur inches, Albert," I answer. Actually it is perha
ps one. "I've made up my mind," he says after a wh
ile, "if they take off my leg, I'll put an end to 
it. I won't go through life as a cripple." So we l
ie there with our thoughts and wait. * * In the ev
ening we are hauled on to the chopping-block. I am
 frightened and think quickly what I ought to do; 
for everyone knows that the surgeons in the dressi
ng stations amputate on the slightest provocation.
 Under the great pressure of business that is much
 simpler than complicated patching. I think of Kem
merich. Whatever happens I will not let them chlor
oform me, even if I have to crack a couple of thei
r skulls. It is all right. The surgeon pokes aroun
d in the wound and a blackness comes before my eye
s. "Don't carry on so," he says gruffly, and hacks
 away. The instruments gleam in the bright light l
ike malevolent animals. The pain is insufferable. 
Two orderlies hold my arms fast, but I break loose
 with one of them and try to crash into the surgeo
n's spectacles just as he notices and springs back
. "Chloroform the scoundrel," he roars madly. Then
 I become quiet. "Pardon me, Herr Doctor, I will k
eep still, but do not chloroform me." "Well now," 
he cackles and takes up his instrument again. He i
s a fair fellow, not more than thirty years old, w
ith scars and disgusting gold spectacles. Now I se
e that he is tormenting me, he is merely raking ab
out in the wound and looking up surreptitiously at
 me over his glasses. My hands squeeze around the 
grips, I'll kick the bucket before he will get a s
queak out of me. He has fished out a piece of shel
l and tosses it to me. Apparently he is pleased at
 my self-control, for he seems to be more consider
ate of me now and says: "To-morrow you'll be off h
ome." Then I am put in plaster. When I am back aga
in with Kropp I tell him that apparently a hospita
l train comes in to-morrow morning. "We must work 
the army medical sergeant-major so that we can kee
p together, Albert." I manage to slip the sergeant
-major two of my cigars with belly-bands, and then
 tip the word to him. He smells the cigars and say
s: "Have you got any more of them?" "Another good 
handful," I say, "and my comrade," I point to Krop
p, "he has some as well. We might possibly be glad
 to hand them to you out of the window of the hosp
ital train in the morning." He understands, of cou
rse, smells them once again and says: "Done." We c
annot get a minute's sleep all night. Seven fellow
s die in our ward. One of them sings hymns in a hi
gh cracked tenor before he begins to gurgle. Anoth
er has crept out of his bed to the window. He lies
 in front of it as though he wants to look out for
 the last time. * * Our stretchers stand on the pl
atform. We wait for the train. It rains and the st
ation has no roof. Our covers are thin. We have wa
ited already two hours. The sergeant-major looks a
fter us like a mother. Although I feel pretty bad 
I do not let our scheme out of my mind. Occasional
ly I let him see the packet and give him one cigar
 in advance. In exchange the sergeant-major covers
 us over with a water-proof sheet. "Albert, old ma
n," I suddenly bethink myself, "our four poster an
d the cat----" "And the club chairs," he adds. Yes
, the club chairs with red plush. In the evening w
e used to sit in them like lords, and intended lat
er on to let them out by the hour. One cigarette p
er hour. It might have turned into a regular busin
ess, a real good living. "And our bags of grub, to
o, Albert." We grow melancholy. We might have made
 some use of the things. If only the train left on
e day later Kat would be sure to find us and bring
 us the stuff. What damned hard luck! In our belli
es there is gruel, mean hospital stuff, and in our
 bags roast pork. But we are so weak that we canno
t work up any more excitement about it. The stretc
hers are sopping wet by the time the train arrives
 in the morning. The sergeant-major sees to it tha
t we are put in the same car. There is a crowd of 
red-cross nurses. Kropp is stowed in below. I am l
ifted up and put into the bed above him. "Good God
!" I exclaim suddenly. "What is it?" asks the sist
er. I cast a glance at the bed. It is covered with
 clean snow-white linen, that even has the marks o
f the iron still on it. And my shirt has gone six 
weeks without being washed and is terribly muddy. 
"Can't you get in by yourself?" asks the sister ge
ntly. "Why yes," I say in a sweat, "but take off t
he bed cover first." "What for?" I feel like a pig
. Must I get in there?--"It will get----" I hesita
te. "A little bit dirty?" she suggests helpfully. 
"That doesn't matter, we will wash it again afterw
ards." "No, no, not that----" I say excitedly. I a
m not equal to such overwhelming refinement. "When
 you have been lying out there in the trenches, su
rely we can wash a sheet," she goes on. I look at 
her, she is young and crisp, spotless and neat, li
ke everything here; a man cannot realize that it i
sn't for officers only, and feels himself strange 
and in some way even alarmed. All the same, the wo
man is a tormentor, she is going to force me to sa
y it. "It is only----" I try again, surely she mus
t know what I mean. "What is it then?" "Because of
 the lice," I bawl out at last. She laughs. "Well,
 they must have a good day for once, too." Now I d
on't care any more. I scramble into bed and pull u
p the covers. A hand gropes over the bed-cover. Th
e sergeant-major. He goes off with the cigars. An 
hour later we notice that we are moving. At night 
I cannot sleep. Kropp is restless too. The train r
ides easily over the rails. I cannot realize it al
l yet; a bed, a train, home. "Albert!" I whisper. 
"Yes----" "Do you know where the latrine is?" "Ove
r to the right of the door, I think." "I'm going t
o have a look." It is dark, I grope for the edge o
f the bed and cautiously try to slide down. But my
 foot finds no support, I begin to slip, the plast
er leg is no help, and with a crash I lie on the f
loor. "Damn!" I say. "Have you bumped yourself?" a
sks Kropp. "You could hear that well enough for yo
urself," I growl, "my head----" A door opens in th
e rear of the car. The sister comes with a light a
nd looks at me. "He has fallen out of bed----" She
 feels my pulse and smooths my forehead. "You have
n't any fever, though." "No." I agree. "Have you b
een dreaming then?" she asks. "Perhaps----" I evad
e. The interrogation starts again. She looks at me
 with her clear eyes, and the more wonderful and s
weet she is the less am I able to tell her what I 
want. I am lifted up into bed again. That will be 
all right. As soon as she goes I must try to climb
 down again. If she were an old woman, it might be
 easier to say what a man wants, but she is so ver
y young, at the most twenty-five, it can't be done
, I cannot possibly tell her. Then Albert comes to
 my rescue, he is not bashful, it makes no differe
nce to him who is upset. He calls to the sister. S
he turns round. "Sister, he wants----" but no more
 does Albert know how to express it modestly and d
ecently. Out there we say it in a single word, but
 here, to such a lady---- All at once he remembers
 his school days and finishes hastily: "He wants t
o leave the room, sister." "Ah!" says the sister, 
"but he shouldn't climb out of his bed with his pl
aster bandage. What do you want then?" she says, t
urning to me. I am in mortal terror at this new tu
rn, for I haven't any idea what the things are cal
led professionally. She comes to my help. "Little 
or big?" This shocking business! I sweat like a pi
g and say shyly: "Well, only quite a little one---
-" At any rate, it produces the effect. I get a bo
ttle. After a few hours I am no longer the only on
e, and by morning we are quite accustomed to it an
d ask for what we want without any false modesty. 
The train travels slowly. Sometimes it halts and t
he dead are unloaded. It halts often. Albert is fe
verish. I feel miserable and have a good deal of p
ain, but the worst of it is that apparently there 
are still lice under the plaster bandage. They itc
h terribly, and I cannot scratch myself. We sleep 
through the days. The country glides quietly past 
the window. The third night we reach Herbstal. I h
ear from the sister that Albert is to be put off a
t the next station because of his fever. "How far 
does the train go?" I ask. "To Cologne." "Albert,"
 I say, "we stick together; you see." On the siste
r's next round I hold my breath and press it up in
to my head. My face swells and turns red. She stop
s. "Are you in pain?" "Yes," I groan, "all of a su
dden." She gives me a thermometer and goes on. I w
ould not have been under Kat's tuition if I did no
t know what to do now. These army thermometers are
 not made for old soldiers. All one has to do is t
o drive the quicksilver up and then it stays there
 without falling again. I stick the thermometer un
der my arm at a slant, and flip it steadily with m
y forefinger. Then I give it a shake. I send it up
 to 100.2°. But that is not enough. A match held c
autiously near to it brings it up to 101.6°. As th
e sister comes back, I blow myself out, breathe in
 short gasps, goggle at her with vacant eyes, toss
 about restlessly, and mutter in a whisper: "I can
't bear it any longer----" She notes me down on a 
slip of paper. I know perfectly well my plaster ba
ndage will not be re-opened if it can be avoided. 
Albert and I are put off together. * * We are in t
he same room in a Catholic Hospital. That is a pie
ce of luck, the Catholic infirmaries are noted for
 their good treatment and good food. The hospital 
has been filled up from our train, there are a gre
at many bad cases amongst them. We do not get exam
ined to-day because there are too few surgeons. Th
e flat trolleys with the rubber wheels pass contin
ually along the corridor, and always with someone 
stretched at full length upon them. A damnable pos
ition, stretched out at full length like that;--th
e only time it is good is when one is asleep. The 
night is very disturbed. No one can sleep. Toward 
morning we doze a little. I wake up just as it gro
ws light. The door stands open and I hear voices f
rom the corridor. The others wake up too. One fell
ow, who has been there a couple of days already ex
plains it to us: "Up here in the corridor every mo
rning the sisters say prayers. They call it Mornin
g Devotion. And so that you can get your share, th
ey leave the door open." No doubt it is well meant
, but it gives us aches in our head and bones. "Su
ch an absurdity!" I say, "just when a man dropped 
off to sleep." "All the light cases are up here, t
hat's why they do it here," he replies. Albert gro
ans. I get furious and call out: "Be quiet out the
re!" A minute later a sister appears. In her black
 and white dress she looks like a beautiful tea-co
sy. "Shut the door, will you, sister?" says someon
e. "We are saying prayers, that is why the door is
 open," she responds. "But we want to go on sleepi
ng----" "Prayer is better than sleep," she stands 
there and smiles innocently. "And it is seven o'cl
ock already." Albert groans again. "Shut the door,
" I snort. She is quite disconcerted. Apparently s
he cannot understand. "But we are saying prayers f
or you too." "Shut the door, anyway." She disappea
rs leaving the door open. The intoning of the Lita
ny proceeds. I feel savage, and say: "I'm going to
 count up to three. If it doesn't stop before then
 I'll let something fly." "Me, too," says another.
 I count up to five. Then I take hold of a bottle,
 aim, and heave it through the door into the corri
dor. It smashes into a thousand pieces. The prayin
g stops. A swarm of sisters appear and reproach us
 in concert. "Shut the door!" we yell. They withdr
aw. The little one who came first is the last to g
o. "Heathen," she chirps, but shuts the door all t
he same. We have won. * * At noon the hospital ins
pector arrives and abuses us. He threatens us with
 clink and all the rest of it. But a hospital insp
ector is just the same as a commissariat inspector
, or any one else who wears a long dagger and shou
lder straps, but is really a clerk, and is never c
onsidered even by a recruit as a real officer. So 
we let him talk. What can they do to us, anyway---
- "Who threw the bottle?" he asks. Before I can th
ink whether I should report myself, someone says: 
"I did." A man with a bristling beard sits up. Eve
ryone is excited; why should he report himself? "Y
ou?" "Yes. I was annoyed because we were waked up 
unnecessarily and lost my senses so that I did not
 know what I was doing." He talks like a book. "Wh
at is your name?" "Reinforcement-Reservist Josef H
amacher." The inspector departs. We are all curiou
s. "But why did you say you did it? It wasn't you 
at all!" He grins. "That doesn't matter. I have a 
shooting licence." Then, of course, we all underst
and. Whoever has a shooting licence can do just wh
atever he pleases. "Yes," he explains, "I got a cr
ack in the head and they presented me with a certi
ficate to say that I was periodically not responsi
ble for my actions. Ever since then I've had a gra
nd time. No one dares to annoy me. And nobody does
 anything to me." "I reported myself because the s
hot amused me. If they open the door again to-morr
ow we will pitch another." We are overjoyed. With 
Josef Hamacher in our midst we can now risk anythi
ng. Then come the soundless, flat trollies to take
 us away. The bandages are stuck fast. We bellow l
ike steers. * * There are eight men in our room. P
eter, a curly black-haired fellow, has the worst i
njury;--a severe lung wound. Franz Wächter, alongs
ide him, has a shot in the arm which didn't look t
oo bad at first. But the third night he calls out 
to us, telling us to ring, he thinks he has a hæmo
rrhage. I ring loudly. The night sister does not c
ome. We have been making rather heavy demands on h
er during the night, because we have all been fres
hly bandaged, and so have a good deal of pain. One
 wants his leg placed so, another so, a third want
s water, a fourth wants her to shake up his pillow
;--in the end the buxom old body grumbled bad temp
eredly and slammed the doors. Now no doubt she thi
nks it is something of the same sort and so she is
 not coming. We wait. Then Franz says: "Ring again
." I do so. Still she does not put in an appearanc
e. In our wing there is only one night sister, per
haps she has something to do in one of the other r
ooms. "Franz, are you quite sure you are bleeding?
" I ask. "Otherwise we shall be getting cursed aga
in." "The bandage is wet. Can't anybody make a lig
ht?" That cannot be done either. The switch is by 
the door and none of us can stand up. I hold my th
umb against the button of the bell till it becomes
 numb. Perhaps the sister has fallen asleep. They 
certainly have a great deal to do and are all over
worked day after day. And added to that is the eve
rlasting praying. "Should we smash a bottle?" asks
 Josef Hamacher of the shooting licence. "She woul
dn't hear that any more than the bell." At last th
e door opens. The old lady appears, mumbling. When
 she perceives Franz's trouble she begins to bustl
e, and says: "Why did not someone say I was wanted
?" "We did ring. And none of us here can walk." He
 has been bleeding badly and she binds him up. In 
the morning we look at his face, it has become sha
rp and yellow, whereas the evening before he looke
d almost healthy. Now a sister comes oftener. * * 
Sometimes there are red-cross voluntary aid sister
s. They are pleasant, but often rather unskilled. 
They frequently give us pain when re-making our be
ds, and then are so frightened that they hurt us s
till more. The nuns are more reliable. They know h
ow they must take hold of us, but we would be more
 pleased if they were somewhat more cheerful. A fe
w of them have real spirit, they are superb. There
 is no one who would not do anything for Sister Li
bertine, this marvellous sister, who spreads good 
cheer through the whole wing even when she can onl
y be seen in the distance. And there are others li
ke her. We would go through fire for her. A man ca
nnot really complain, here he is treated by the nu
ns exactly like a civilian. On the other hand, jus
t to think of a garrison hospital gives a man the 
creeps. Franz Wachter does not regain his strength
. One day he is taken away and does not come back.
 Josef Hamacher knows all about it: "We shan't see
 him again. They have put him in the dead room." "
What do you mean, Dead Room?" asks Kropp. "Well, D
ying Room----" "What is that, then?" "A little roo
m at the corner of the building. Whoever is about 
to kick the bucket is put in there. There are two 
beds in it. It is generally called the Dying Room.
" "But what do they do that for?" "They don't have
 so much work to do afterwards. It is more conveni
ent, too, because it lies right beside the lift to
 the mortuary. Perhaps also they do it for the sak
e of the others, so that no one in the ward dies i
n sympathy. And they can look after him better, to
o, if he is by himself." "But what about him?" Jos
ef shrugs his shoulders. "Usually he doesn't take 
much notice any more." "Does everybody know about 
it then?" "Anyone who has been here long enough kn
ows, of course." * * In the afternoon Franz Wachte
r's bed has a fresh occupant. A couple of days lat
er they take the new man away, too. Josef makes a 
significant gesture. We see many come and go. Ofte
n relatives sit by the beds and weep or talk softl
y and awkwardly. One old woman will not go away, b
ut she cannot stay there the whole night through. 
Another morning she comes very early, but not earl
y enough; for as she goes up to the bed, someone e
lse is in it already. She has to go to the mortuar
y. The apples that she has brought with her she gi
ves to us. And then little Peter begins to get wor
se. His temperature chart looks bad, and one day t
he flat trolley stands beside his bed. "Where to?"
 he asks. "To the bandaging ward." He is lifted ou
t. But the sister makes the mistake of removing hi
s tunic from the hook and putting it on the trolle
y too, so that she should not have to make two jou
rneys. Peter understands immediately and tries to 
roll off the trolley. "I'm stopping here!" They pu
sh him back. He cries out feebly with his shattere
d lung: "I won't go to the Dying Room." "But we ar
e going to the bandaging ward." "Then what do you 
want my tunic for?" He can speak no more. Hoarse, 
agitated, he whispers: "Stopping here!" They do no
t answer but wheel him out. At the door he tries t
o raise himself up. His black curly head sways, hi
s eyes are full of tears. "I will come back again!
 I will come back again!" he cries. The door shuts
. We are all excited; but we say nothing. At last 
Josef says: "Many a man has said that. Once a man 
is in there, he never comes through." * * I am ope
rated on and vomit for two days. My bones will not
 grow together, so the surgeon's secretary says. A
nother fellow's have grown crooked; his are broken
 again. It is disgusting. Among our new arrivals t
here are two young soldiers with flat feet. The ch
ief surgeon discovers them on his rounds, and is o
verjoyed. "We'll soon put that right," he tells th
em, "we will just do a small operation, and then y
ou will have perfectly sound feet. Enter them down
, sister." As soon as he is gone, Josef, who knows
 everything, warns them: "Don't you let him operat
e on you! That is a special scientific stunt of th
e old boy's. He goes absolutely crazy whenever he 
can get hold of anyone to do it on. He operates on
 you for flat feet, and there's no mistake, you do
n't have them any more; you have club feet instead
, and have to walk all the rest of your life on st
icks." "What should a man do, then?" asks one of t
hem. "Say No. You are here to be cured of your wou
nd, not your flat feet. Did you have any trouble w
ith them in the field? No, well, there you are! At
 present you can still walk, but if once the old b
oy gets you under the knife you'll be cripples. Wh
at he wants is little dogs to experiment with, so 
the war is a glorious time for him, as it is for a
ll the surgeons. You take a look down below at the
 staff; there are a dozen fellows hobbling around 
that he has operated on. A lot of them have been h
ere all the time since 'fourteen and 'fifteen. Not
 a single one of them can walk better than he coul
d before, almost all of them worse, and most only 
with plaster legs. Every six months he catches the
m again and breaks their bones afresh, and every t
ime is going to be the successful one. You take my
 word, he won't dare to do it if you say No." "Ach
, man," says one of the two unfortunates, "better 
your feet than your brain-box. There's no telling 
what you'll get if you go back out there again? Th
ey can do with me just as they please, so long as 
I get back home. Better to have a club foot than b
e dead." The other, a young fellow like ourselves,
 won't have it done. One morning the old man has t
he two hauled up and lectures and jaws at them so 
long, that in the end they consent. What else coul
d they do?--They are mere privates, and he is a bi
g bug. They are brought back chloroformed and plas
tered. * * It is going badly with Albert. They hav
e taken him and amputated his leg. The whole leg h
as been taken off from the thigh. Now he hardly sp
eaks any more. Once he says he will shoot himself 
the first time he can get hold of his revolver aga
in. A new convoy arrives. Our room gets two blind 
men. One of them is a very youthful musician. The 
sisters never have a knife with them when they fee
d him; he has already snatched one from a sister. 
But in spite of this caution there is an incident.
 In the evening, while he is being fed, the sister
 is called away, and leaves the plate with the for
k on his table. He gropes for the fork, seizes it 
and drives it with all his force against his heart
, then he snatches up a shoe and strikes with it a
gainst the handle as hard as he can. We call for h
elp and three men are necessary to take the fork a
way from him. The blunt prongs had already penetra
ted deep. He abuses us all night so that no one ca
n go to sleep. In the morning he has lock-jaw. Aga
in beds become empty. Day after day goes by with p
ain and fear, groans and death-gurgles. Even the D
eath Room is no use any more, it is too small; fel
lows die during the night in our room. They go eve
n faster than the sisters can cope with them. But 
one day the door flies open, the flat trolley roll
s in, and there on the stretcher, pale, thin, upri
ght and triumphant, with his shaggy head of curls 
sits Peter. Sister Libertine with beaming looks pu
shes him over to his former bed. He is back from t
he Dying Room. We have long supposed him dead. He 
looks round: "What do you say now?" And even Josef
 has to admit that it is the first time he has eve
r known of such a thing. * * Gradually a few of us
 venture to stand up. And I am given crutches to h
obble around on. But I do not make much use of the
m; I cannot bear Albert's gaze as I move about the
 room. His eyes always follow me with such a stran
ge look. So I sometimes escape to the corridor;--t
here I can move about more freely. On the next flo
or below are the abdominal and spine cases, head w
ounds and double amputations. On the right side of
 the wing are the jaw wounds, gas cases, nose, ear
, and neck wounds. On the left the blind and the l
ung wounds, pelvis wounds, wounds in the joints, w
ounds in the testicles, wounds in the intestines. 
Here a man realizes for the first time in how many
 places a man can get hit. Two fellows die of teta
nus. Their skin turns pale, their limbs stiffen, a
t last only their eyes live--stubbornly. Many of t
he wounded have their shattered limbs hanging free
 in the air from a gallows; underneath the wound a
 basin is placed into which the pus drips. Every t
wo or three hours the vessel is emptied. Other men
 lie in stretching bandages with heavy weights han
ging from the end of the bed. I see intestine woun
ds that are constantly full of excreta. The surgeo
n's clerk shows me X-ray photographs of completely
 smashed hip-bones, knees, and shoulders. A man ca
nnot realize that above such shattered bodies ther
e are still human faces in which life goes its dai
ly round. And this is only one hospital, one singl
e station; there are hundreds of thousands in Germ
any, hundreds of thousands in France, hundreds of 
thousands in Russia. How senseless is everything t
hat can ever be written, done, or thought, when su
ch things are possible. It must all be lies and of
 no account when the culture of a thousand years c
ould not prevent this stream of blood being poured
 out, these torture-chambers in their hundreds of 
thousands. A hospital alone shows what war is. I a
m young, I am twenty years old; yet I know nothing
 of life but despair, death, fear, and fatuous sup
erficiality cast over an abyss of sorrow. I see ho
w peoples are set against one another, and in sile
nce, unknowingly, foolishly, obediently, innocentl
y slay one another. I see that the keenest brains 
of the world invent weapons and words to make it y
et more refined and enduring. And all men of my ag
e, here and over there, throughout the whole world
, see these things; all my generation is experienc
ing these things with me. What would our fathers d
o if we suddenly stood up and came before them and
 proffered our account? What do they expect of us 
if a time ever comes when the war is over? Through
 the years our business has been killing;--it was 
our first calling in life. Our knowledge of life i
s limited to death. What will happen afterwards? A
nd what shall come out of us? * * The oldest man i
n our room is Lewandowski. He is forty, and has al
ready lain ten months in the hospital with a sever
e abdominal wound. Just in the last few weeks he h
as improved sufficiently to be able to hobble abou
t doubled up. For some days past he has been in gr
eat excitement. His wife has written to him from t
he little home in Poland where she lives, telling 
him that she has saved up enough money to pay for 
the fare, and is coming to see him. She is already
 on the way and may arrive any day. Lewandowski ha
s lost his appetite, he even gives away red cabbag
e and sausage after he has had a couple of mouthfu
ls. He goes round the room perpetually with the le
tter. Everyone has already read it a dozen times, 
the post-marks have been examined heaven knows how
 often, the address is hardly legible any longer f
or spots of grease and thumb-marks, and in the end
 what is sure to happen, happens: Lewandowski deve
lops a fever, and has to go back to bed. He has no
t seen his wife for two years. In the meantime she
 has given birth to a child, whom she is bringing 
with her. But something else occupies Lewandowski'
s thoughts. He had hoped to get permission to go o
ut when his old woman came; for obviously seeing i
s all very well, but when a man gets his wife agai
n after such a long time, if at all possible, a ma
n wants something else besides. Lewandowski has di
scussed it all with us at great length; in the arm
y there are no secrets about such things. And what
's more, nobody finds anything objectionable in it
. Those of us who are already able to go out have 
told him of a couple of very good spots in the tow
n, parks and squares, where he would not be distur
bed; one of us even knows of a little room. But wh
at is the use, there Lewandowski lies in bed with 
his troubles. Life holds no more joy for him if he
 has to forego this affair. We console him and pro
mise to get over the difficulty somehow or other. 
One afternoon his wife appears, a tousled little t
hing with anxious, quick eyes like a bird, in a so
rt of black, crinkly mantilla with ribbons; heaven
 knows where she inherited the thing. She murmurs 
something softly and stands shyly in the doorway. 
It terrifies her that there are six of us men pres
ent. "Well, Marja," says Lewandowski, and gulps da
ngerously with his Adam's apple, "you can come in 
all right, they won't hurt you." She goes the roun
d and proffers each of us her hand. Then she produ
ces the child, which in the interval has done some
thing in its napkin. From a large handbag embroide
red with pearls she takes out a clean one and make
s the child fresh and presentable. This dispels he
r first embarrassment, and the two begin to talk. 
Lewandowski is very fidgety, every now and then he
 squints across at us most unhappily with his roun
d goggle eyes. The time is favourable, the doctor'
s visit is over, at the most there couldn't be mor
e than one sister left in the ward. So one of us g
oes out to prospect. He comes back and nods. "Not 
a soul to be seen. Now's your chance, Johann, set 
to." The two speak together in an undertone. The w
oman turns a little red and looks embarrassed. We 
grin good-naturedly and make pooh-poohing gestures
, what does it matter! The devil take all the conv
entions, they were made for other times; here lies
 the carpenter Johann Lewandowski, a soldier shot 
to a cripple, and there is his wife; who knows whe
n he will see her again? He wants to have her, and
 he should have her, good. Two men stand at the do
or to forestall the sisters and keep them occupied
 if they chance to come along. They agree to stand
 guard for a quarter of an hour or thereabouts. Le
wandowski can only lie on his side, so one of us p
rops a couple of pillows against his back. Albert 
gets the child to hold, we all turn round a bit, t
he black mantilla disappears under the bed-clothes
, we make a great clatter and play skat noisily. A
ll goes well. I hold a club solo with four jacks w
hich nearly goes the round. In the process we almo
st forget Lewandowski. After a while the child beg
ins to squall, although Albert, in desperation, ro
cks it to and fro. Then there is a bit of creaking
 and rustling, and as we look up casually we see t
hat the child has the bottle in its mouth, and is 
back again with its mother. The business is over. 
We now feel ourselves like one big family, the wom
an is rather quieter, and Lewandowski lies there s
weating and beaming. He unpacks the embroidered ha
ndbag, and a couple of good sausages comes to ligh
t; Lewandowski takes up the knife with a flourish 
and saws the meat into slices. With a handsome ges
ture he waves toward us--and the little woman goes
 from one to the other and smiles at us and hands 
round the sausage; she now looks quite handsome. W
e call her Mother, she is pleased and shakes up ou
r pillows for us. * * After a few weeks I have to 
go each morning to the massage department. There m
y leg is harnessed up and made to move. The arm ha
s healed long since. New convoys arrive from the l
ine. The bandages are no longer made of cloth, but
 of white crêpe paper. Rag bandages have become sc
arce at the front. Albert's stump heals well. The 
wound is almost closed. In a few weeks he should g
o off to an institute for artificial limbs. He con
tinues not to talk much, and is much more solemn t
han formerly. He often breaks off in his speech an
d stares in front of him. If he were not here with
 us he would have shot himself long ago. But now h
e is over the worst of it, and he often looks on w
hile we play skat. I get convalescent leave. My mo
ther does not want to let me go away. She is so fe
eble. It is all much worse than it was last time. 
Then I am sent on from the base and return once mo
re to the line. Parting from my friend Albert Krop
p was very hard. But a man gets used to that sort 
of thing in the army. CHAPTER XI We count the week
s no more. It was winter when I came up, and when 
the shells exploded the frozen clods of earth were
 just as dangerous as the fragments. Now the trees
 are green again. Our life alternates between bill
ets and the front. We have almost grown accustomed
 to it; war is a cause of death like cancer and tu
berculosis, like influenza and dysentery. The deat
hs are merely more frequent, more varied and terri
ble. Our thoughts are clay, they are moulded with 
the changes of the days;--when we are resting they
 are good; under fire, they are dead. Fields of cr
aters within and without. Everyone is so, not only
 ourselves here--the things that existed before ar
e no longer valid, and one practically knows them 
no more. Distinctions, breeding, education are cha
nged, are almost blotted out and hardly recognizab
le any longer. Sometimes they give an advantage fo
r profiting by a situation;--but they also bring c
onsequences along with them, in that they arouse p
rejudices which have to be overcome. It is as thou
gh formerly we were coins of different provinces; 
and now we are melted down, and all bear the same 
stamp. To re-discover the old distinctions, the me
tal itself must be tested. First we are soldiers a
nd afterwards, in a strange and shamefaced fashion
, individual men as well. It is a great brotherhoo
d, which to a condition of life arising out of the
 midst of danger, out of the tension and forlornne
ss of death, adds something of the good-fellowship
 of the folk-song, of the feeling of solidarity of
 convicts, and of the desperate loyalty to one ano
ther of men condemned to death--seeking in a wholl
y unpathetic way a fleeting enjoyment of the hours
 as they come. If one wants to appraise it, it is 
at once heroic and banal--but who wants to do that
? It is this, for example, that makes Tjaden spoon
 down his ham-and-pea soup in such tearing haste w
hen an enemy attack is reported, simply because he
 cannot be sure that in an hour's time he will sti
ll be alive. We have discussed at length, whether 
it is right or not to do so. Kat condemns it, beca
use, he says, a man has to reckon with the possibi
lity of an abdominal wound, and that is more dange
rous on a full stomach than on an empty one. Such 
things are real problems, they are serious matters
 to us, they cannot be otherwise. Here, on the bor
ders of death, life follows an amazingly simple co
urse, it is limited to what is most necessary, all
 else lies buried in gloomy sleep;--in that lies o
ur primitiveness and our survival. Were we more su
btly differentiated we must long since have gone m
ad, have deserted, or have fallen. As in a polar e
xpedition, every expression of life must serve onl
y the preservation of existence, and is absolutely
 focussed on that. All else is banished because it
 would consume energies unnecessarily. That is the
 only way to save ourselves. In the quiet hours wh
en the puzzling reflection of former days, like a 
blurred mirror, projects beyond me the figure of m
y present existence, I often sit over against myse
lf, as before a stranger, and wonder how the unnam
eable active principle that calls itself Life has 
adapted itself even to this form. All other expres
sions lie in a winter sleep, life is simply one co
ntinual watch against the menace of death;--it has
 transformed us into unthinking animals in order t
o give us the weapon of instinct--it has reinforce
d us with dullness, so that we do not go to pieces
 before the horror, which would overwhelm us if we
 had clear, conscious thought--it has awakened in 
us the sense of comradeship, so that we escape the
 abyss of solitude--it has lent us the indifferenc
e of wild creatures, so that in spite of all we pe
rceive the positive in every moment, and store it 
up as a reserve against the onslaught of nothingne
ss. Thus we live a closed, hard existence of the u
tmost superficiality, and rarely does an incident 
strike out a spark. But then unexpectedly a flame 
of grievous and terrible yearning flares up. Those
 are the dangerous moments. They show us that the 
adjustment is only artificial, that it is not simp
le rest, but sharpest struggle for rest. In the ou
tward form of our life we are hardly distinguishab
le from Bushmen; but whereas the latter can be so 
always, because they are so truly, and at best may
 develop further by exertion of their spiritual fo
rces, with us it is the reverse;--our inner forces
 are not exerted toward regeneration, but toward d
egeneration. The Bushmen are primitive and natural
ly so, but we are primitive in an artificial sense
, and by virtue of the utmost effort. And at night
, waking out of a dream, overwhelmed and bewitched
 by the crowding faces, a man perceives with alarm
 how slight is the support, how thin the boundary 
that divides him from the darkness. We are little 
flames poorly sheltered by frail walls against the
 storm of dissolution and madness, in which we fli
cker and sometimes almost go out. Then the muffled
 roar of the battle becomes a ring that encircles 
us, we creep in upon ourselves, and with big eyes 
stare into the night. Our only comfort is the stea
dy breathing of our comrades asleep, and thus we w
ait for the morning. * * Every day and every hour 
every shell and every death cuts into this thin su
pport, and the years waste it rapidly. I see how i
t is already gradually breaking down around me. Th
ere is the mad story of Detering. He was one of th
ose who kept himself to himself. His misfortune wa
s that he saw a cherry tree in a garden. We were j
ust coming back from the front line, and at a turn
ing of the road near our new billets, marvellous i
n the morning twilight, stood this cherry tree bef
ore us. It had no leaves, but was one white mass o
f blossom. In the evening Detering was not to be s
een. Then at last he came back and had a couple of
 branches of cherry blossom in his hand. We made f
un of him, and asked whether he was going to a wed
ding. He made no answer, but laid them on his bed.
 During the night I heard him making a noise, he s
eemed to be packing. I sensed something amiss and 
went over to him. He made out it was nothing, and 
I said to him: "Don't do anything silly, Detering.
" "Ach, why--it's merely that I can't sleep----" "
What did you pick the cherry branches for?" "I mig
ht have been going to get some more cherry branche
s," he replied, evasively--and after a while: "I h
ave a big orchard with cherry trees at home. When 
they are in blossom, from the hay loft they look l
ike one single sheet, so white. It is just the tim
e." "Perhaps you will get leave soon. You may even
 be sent back as a farmer." He nodded, but he was 
far away. When these peasants are excited they hav
e a curious expression, a mixture of cow and yearn
ing god, half stupid and half rapt. In order to tu
rn him away from his thoughts I asked him for a pi
ece of bread. He gave it to me without a murmur. T
hat was suspicious, for he is usually tight-fisted
. So I stayed awake. Nothing happened; in the morn
ing he was as usual. Apparently he had noticed tha
t I had been watching him;--but the second morning
 after he was gone. I noticed it, but said nothing
, in order to give him time; he might perhaps get 
through. Various fellows have already got into Hol
land. But at roll call he was missed. A week after
 we heard that he had been caught by the field gen
darmes, those despicable military police. He had h
eaded toward Germany, that was hopeless, of course
--and, of course, he did everything else just as i
diotically. Anyone might have known that his fligh
t was only home-sickness and a momentary aberratio
n. But what does a court martial hundreds of miles
 behind the front-line know about it? We have hear
d nothing more of Detering. * * But sometimes it b
roke out in other ways, this danger, these pent-up
 things, as from an overheated boiler. It will be 
enough to tell how Berger met his end. Our trenche
s have now for some time been shot to pieces, and 
we have an elastic line, so that there is practica
lly no longer any proper trench warfare. When atta
ck and counter-attack have waged backwards and for
wards there remains a broken line and a bitter str
uggle from crater to crater. The front line has be
en penetrated, and everywhere small groups have es
tablished themselves, the fight is carried on from
 clusters of shell-holes. We are in a crater, the 
English are coming down obliquely, they are turnin
g our flank and working in behind us. We are surro
unded. It is not easy to surrender, fog and smoke 
hang over us, no one would recognize that we wante
d to give ourselves up, and perhaps we don't want 
to, a man doesn't even know himself at such moment
s. We hear the explosions of the hand-grenades com
ing toward us. Our machine-gun sweeps over the sem
icircle in front of us. The cooling-water evaporat
es, we hastily pass round the case, every man piss
es in it, and thus we again have water, and are ab
le to continue firing. But behind us the attack cr
ashes ever nearer. A few minutes and we are lost. 
Then, at closest range, a second machine-gun burst
s out. It is set up in a crater alongside us; Berg
er has fetched it, and now the counter-attack come
s over from behind; we are set free and make conta
ct with the rear. Afterwards, as we lie in compara
tively good cover, one of the food-carriers report
s that a couple of hundred yards distant there lie
s a wounded messenger-dog. "Where?" asks Berger. T
he other describes the place to him. Berger goes o
ff either to fetch the beast in or to shoot it. Si
x months ago he would not have cared, he would hav
e been reasonable. We try to prevent him. Then, as
 he goes off grimly, all we can say is: "You're ma
d," and let him go. For these cases of front-line 
madness become dangerous if one is not able to fli
ng the man to the ground and hold him fast. And Be
rger is six feet and the most powerful man in the 
company. He is absolutely mad for he has to pass t
hrough the barrage; but this lightning that lowers
 somewhere above us all has struck him and made hi
m demented. It affects others so that they begin t
o rave, to run away--there was one man who even tr
ied to dig himself into the ground with hands, fee
t, and teeth. It is true, such things are often si
mulated, but the pretence itself is a symptom. Ber
ger, who means to finish off the dog, is carried o
ff with a wound in the pelvis, and one of the fell
ows who carry him gets a bullet in the cheek while
 doing it. * * Müller is dead. Someone shot him po
int blank with a Verey light in the stomach. He li
ved for half an hour, quite conscious, and in terr
ible pain. Before he died he handed over his pocke
tbook to me, and bequeathed me his boots--the same
 that he once inherited from Kemmerich. I wear the
m, for they fit me quite well. After me Tjaden wil
l get them, I have promised them to him. We have b
een able to bury Müller, but he is not likely to r
emain long undisturbed. Our lines are falling back
. There are too many fresh English and American re
giments over there. There's too much corned beef a
nd white wheaten bread. Too many new guns. Too man
y aeroplanes. But we are emaciated and starved. Ou
r food is so bad and mixed up with so much substit
ute stuff that it makes us ill. The factory owners
 in Germany have grown wealthy;--dysentery dissolv
es our bowels. The latrine poles are always densel
y crowded; the people at home ought to be shown th
ese grey, yellow, miserable, wasted faces here, th
ese bent figures from whose bodies the colic wring
s out the blood, and who with lips trembling and d
istorted with pain, grin at one another and say: "
It is not much sense pulling up one's trousers aga
in----" Our artillery is fired out, it has too few
 shells and the barrels are so worn that they shoo
t uncertainly, and scatter so widely as even to fa
ll on ourselves. We have too few horses. Our fresh
 troops are anaemic boys in need of rest, who cann
ot carry a pack, but merely know how to die. By th
ousands. They understand nothing about warfare, th
ey simply go on and let themselves be shot down. A
 single flyer routed two companies of them for a j
oke, just as they came fresh from the train--befor
e they had ever heard of such a thing as cover. "G
ermany ought to be empty soon," says Kat. We have 
given up hope that some day an end may come. We ne
ver think so far. A man can stop a bullet and be k
illed; he can get wounded, and then the hospital i
s his next stop. There, if they do not amputate hi
m, he sooner or later falls into the hands of one 
of those staff surgeons who, with the War Service 
Cross in his button-hole, says to him: "What, one 
leg a bit short? If you have any pluck you don't n
eed to run at the front. The man is A1. Dismiss!" 
Kat tells a story that has travelled the whole len
gth of the front from the Vosges to Flanders;--of 
the staff surgeon who reads the names on the list,
 and when a man comes before him, without looking 
up, says: "A1. We need soldiers up there." A fello
w with a wooden leg comes up before him, the staff
 surgeon again says A1---- "And then," Kat raises 
his voice, "the fellow says to him: 'I already hav
e a wooden leg, but when I go back again and they 
shoot off my head, then I will get a wooden head m
ade and become a staff surgeon." This answer tickl
es us all immensely. There may be good doctors, an
d there are, lots of them; all the same, every sol
dier some time during his hundreds of inspections 
falls into the clutches of one of these countless 
hero-grabbers who pride themselves on changing as 
many C3's and B3's as possible into A1's. There ar
e many such stories, they are mostly far more bitt
er. All the same, they have nothing to do with mut
iny or lead-swinging. They are merely honest and c
all a thing by its name; for there is a very great
 deal of fraud, injustice, and baseness in the arm
y.--Is it nothing that regiment after regiment ret
urns again and again to the ever more hopeless str
uggle, that attack follows attack along the weaken
ing, retreating, crumbling line? From a mockery th
e tanks have become a terrible weapon. Armoured th
ey come rolling on in long lines, and more than an
ything else embody for us the horror of war. We do
 not see the guns that bombard us; the attacking l
ines of the enemy infantry are men like ourselves;
 but these tanks are machines, their caterpillars 
run on as endless as the war, they are annihilatio
n, they roll without feeling into the craters, and
 climb up again without stopping, a fleet of roari
ng, smoke-belching armour-clads, invulnerable stee
l beasts squashing the dead and the wounded--we sh
rivel up in our thin skin before them, against the
ir colossal weight our arms are sticks of straw, a
nd our hand-grenades matches. Shells, gas clouds, 
and flotillas of tanks--shattering, starvation, de
ath. Dysentery, influenza, typhus--murder, burning
, death. Trenches, hospitals, the common grave--th
ere are no other possibilities. * * In one attack 
our Company Commander, Bertinck, falls. He was one
 of those superb front-line officers who are forem
ost in every hot place. He was with us for two yea
rs without being wounded, so that something had to
 happen in the end. We occupy a crater and get sur
rounded. The stink of petroleum or oil blows acros
s with the fumes of powder. Two fellows with a fla
me-thrower are seen, one carries the tin on his ba
ck, the other has the hose in his hands from which
 the fire spouts. If they get so near that they ca
n reach us we are done for, we cannot retreat yet.
 We open fire on them. But they work nearer and th
ings begin to look bad. Bertinck is lying in the h
ole with us. When he sees that we cannot escape be
cause under the sharp fire we must make the most o
f this cover, he takes a rifle, crawls out of the 
hole, and lying down propped on his elbows, he tak
es aim. He fires--the same moment a bullet smacks 
into him, they have got him. Still he lies and aim
s again;--once he shifts and again takes his aim; 
at last the rifle cracks. Bertinck lets the gun dr
op and says: "Good," and slips back into the hole.
 The hindermost of the two flame-throwers is hit, 
he falls, the hose slips away from the other fello
w, the fire squirts about on all sides and the man
 burns. Bertinck has a chest wound. After a while 
a fragment smashes away his chin, and the same fra
gment has sufficient force to tear open Leer's hip
. Leer groans as he supports himself on his arm, h
e bleeds quickly, no one can help him. Like an emp
tying tube, after a couple of minutes he collapses
. What use is it to him now that he was such a goo
d mathematician at school. * * The months pass by.
 The summer of 1918 is the most bloody and the mos
t terrible. The days stand like angels in gold and
 blue, incomprehensible, above the ring of annihil
ation. Every man here knows that we are losing the
 war. Not much is said about it, we are falling ba
ck, we will not be able to attack again after this
 big offensive, we have no more men and no more am
munition. Still the campaign goes on--the dying go
es on---- Summer of 1918--Never has life in its ni
ggardliness seemed to us so desirable as now;--the
 red poppies in the meadows round our billets, the
 smooth beetles on the blades of grass, the warm e
venings in the cool, dim rooms, the black, mysteri
ous trees of the twilight, the stars and the flowi
ng waters, dreams and long sleep----. O Life, life
, life! Summer of 1918--Never was so much silently
 suffered as in the moment when we depart once aga
in for the front-line. Wild, tormenting rumours of
 an armistice and peace are in the air, they lay h
old on our hearts and make the return to the front
 harder than ever. Summer of 1918--Never was life 
in the line more bitter and more full of horror th
an in the hours of the bombardment, when the blanc
hed faces lie in the dirt, and the hands clutch at
 the one thought: No! No! Not now! Not now at the 
last moment! Summer of 1918--Breath of hope that s
weeps over the scorched fields, raging fever of im
patience, of disappointment, of the most agonizing
 terror of death, insensate question: Why? Why do 
they not make an end? And why do these rumours of 
an end fly about? * * There are so many airmen her
e, and they are so sure of themselves that they gi
ve chase to single individuals, just as though the
y were hares. For every one German plane there com
e at least five English and American. For one hung
ry, wretched German soldier come five of the enemy
, fresh and fit. For one German army loaf there ar
e fifty tins of canned beef over there. We are not
 beaten, for as soldiers we are better and more ex
perienced; we are simply crushed and driven back b
y overwhelmingly superior forces. Behind us lie ra
iny weeks--grey sky, grey fluid earth, grey dying.
 If we go out, the rain at once soaks through our 
overcoat and clothing;--and we remain wet all the 
time we are in the line. We never get dry. Those w
ho still wear high boots tie sand bags round the t
op so that the mud does not pour in so fast. The r
ifles are caked, the uniforms caked, everything is
 fluid and dissolved, the earth one dripping, soak
ed, oily mass in which lie the yellow pools with r
ed spiral streams of blood and into which the dead
, wounded, and survivors slowly sink down. The sto
rm lashes us, out of the confusion of grey and yel
low the hail of splinters whips forth the childlik
e cries of the wounded, and in the night shattered
 life groans wearily to the silence. Our hands are
 earth, our bodies clay and our eyes pools of rain
. We do not know whether we still live. Then the h
eat sinks heavily into our shell holes like a jell
y fish, moist and oppressive, and on one of these 
late summer days, while bringing food, Kat falls. 
We two are alone. I bind up his wound; his shin se
ems to be smashed. It has got the bone, and Kat gr
oans desperately: "At last--just at the last----" 
I comfort him. "Who knows how long the mess will g
o on yet! Now you are saved----" The wound begins 
to bleed fast. Kat cannot be left by himself while
 I try to find a stretcher. Anyway, I don't know o
f a stretcher-bearer's post in the neighbourhood. 
Kat is not very heavy; so I take him up on my back
 and start off to the dressing station with him. T
wice we rest. He suffers acutely on the way. We do
 not speak much. I have opened the collar of my tu
nic and breathe heavily, I sweat and my face is sw
ollen with the strain of carrying. All the same I 
urge him to let us go on, for the place is dangero
us. "Shall we go on again, Kat?" "Must, Paul." "Th
en come." I raise him up, he stands on the uninjur
ed leg and supports himself against a tree. I take
 up the wounded leg carefully, then he gives a jum
p and I take the knee of the sound leg also under 
my arm. The going is more difficult. Often a shell
 whistles across. I go as quickly as I can, for th
e blood from Kat's wound drips to the ground. We c
annot shelter ourselves properly from the explosio
ns; before we can take cover the danger is all ove
r. We lie down in a small shell hole to rest. I gi
ve Kat some tea from my water bottle. We smoke a c
igarette. "Well, Kat," I say gloomily, "We are goi
ng to be separated at last." He is silent and look
s at me. "Do you remember, Kat, how we commandeere
d the goose? And how you brought me out of the bar
rage when I was still a young recruit and was woun
ded for the first time? I cried then. Kat, that is
 almost three years ago." He nods. The anguish of 
solitude rises up in me. When Kat is taken away I 
will not have one friend left. "Kat, in any case w
e must see one another again, if it is peace time 
before you come back." "Do you think that I will b
e marked A1 again with this leg?" he asks bitterly
. "With rest it will get better. The joint is all 
right. It may limp a bit." "Give me another cigare
tte," he says. "Perhaps we could do something toge
ther later on, Kat." I am very miserable, it is im
possible that Kat--Kat my friend, Kat with the dro
oping shoulders and the poor, thin moustache, Kat,
 whom I know as I know no other man, Kat with whom
 I have shared these years--it is impossible that 
perhaps I shall not see Kat again. "In any case gi
ve me your address at home, Kat. And here is mine,
 I will write it down for you." I write his addres
s in my pocket book. How forlorn I am already, tho
ugh he still sits here beside me. Couldn't I shoot
 myself quickly in the foot so as to be able to go
 with him. Suddenly Kat gurgles and turns green an
d yellow. "Let us go on," he stammers. I jump up, 
eager to help him, I take him up and start off at 
a run, a slow steady pace, so as not to jolt his l
eg too much. My throat is parched; everything danc
es red and black before my eyes, I stagger on dogg
edly and pitilessly and at last reach the dressing
 station. There I drop down on my knees, but have 
still enough strength to fall on to the side where
 Kat's sound leg is. After a few minutes I straigh
ten myself up again. My legs and my hands tremble.
 I have trouble in finding my water bottle, to tak
e a pull. My lips tremble as I try to drink. But I
 smile--Kat is saved. After a while I begin to sor
t out the confusion of voices that falls on my ear
s. "You might have spared yourself that," says an 
orderly. I look at him without comprehending. He p
oints to Kat. "He is stone dead." I do not underst
and him. "He has been hit in the shin," I say. The
 orderly stands still. "That as well." I turn roun
d. My eyes are still dulled, the sweat breaks out 
on me again, it runs over my eyelids. I wipe it aw
ay and peer at Kat. He lies still. "Fainted," I sa
y quickly. The orderly whistles softly. "I know be
tter than that. He is dead. I'll lay any money on 
that." I shake my head: "Not possible. Only ten mi
nutes ago I was talking to him. He has fainted." K
at's hands are warm, I pass my arm under his shoul
ders in order to rub his temples with some tea. I 
feel my fingers become moist. As I draw them away 
from behind his head, they are bloody. "You see---
-" The orderly whistles once more through his teet
h. On the way without my having noticed it, Kat ha
s caught a splinter in the head. There is just one
 little hole, it must have been a very tiny, stray
 splinter. But it has sufficed. Kat is dead. Slowl
y I get up. "Would you like to take his pay book a
nd his things?" the lance-corporal asks me. I nod,
 and he gives them to me. The orderly is mystified
. "You are not related, are you?" No, we are not r
elated. No, we are not related. Do I walk? Have I 
feet still? I raise my eyes, I let them move round
, and turn myself with them, one circle, one circl
e, and I stand in the midst. All is as usual. Only
 the Militiaman Stanislaus Katczinsky has died. Th
en I know nothing more. CHAPTER XII It is autumn. 
There are not many of the old hands left. I am the
 last of the seven fellows from our class. Everyon
e talks of peace and armistice. All wait. If it ag
ain proves an illusion, then they will break up; h
ope is high, it cannot be taken away again without
 an upheaval. If there is not peace, then there wi
ll be revolution. I have fourteen days rest, becau
se I have swallowed a bit of gas; in a little gard
en I sit the whole day long in the sun. The armist
ice is coming soon, I believe it now too. Then we 
will go home. Here my thoughts stop and will not g
o any farther. All that meets me, all that floods 
over me are but feelings--greed of life, love of h
ome, yearning of the blood, intoxication of delive
rance. But no aims. Had we returned home in 1916, 
out of the suffering and the strength of our exper
iences we might have unleashed a storm. Now if we 
go back we will be weary, broken, burnt out, rootl
ess, and without hope. We will not be able to find
 our way any more. And men will not understand us-
-for the generation that grew up before us, though
 it has passed these years with us here, already h
ad a home and a calling; now it will return to its
 old occupations, and the war will be forgotten--a
nd the generation that has grown up after us will 
be strange to us and push us aside. We will be sup
erfluous even to ourselves, we will grow older, a 
few will adapt themselves, some others will merely
 submit, and most will be bewildered;--the years w
ill pass by and in the end we shall fall into ruin
. But perhaps all this that I think is mere melanc
holy and dismay, which will fly away as the dust, 
when I stand once again beneath the poplars and li
sten to the rustling of their leaves. It cannot be
 that it has gone, the yearning that made our bloo
d unquiet, the unknown, the perplexing, the oncomi
ng things, the thousand faces of the future, the m
elodies from dreams and from books, the whispers a
nd divinations of women, it cannot be that this ha
s vanished in bombardment, in despair, in brothels
. Here the trees show gay and golden, the berries 
of the rowan stand red among the leaves, country r
oads run white out to the sky line, and the cantee
ns hum like beehives with rumours of peace. I stan
d up. I am very quiet. Let the months and years co
me, they bring me nothing more, they can bring me 
nothing more. I am so alone, and so without hope t
hat I can confront them without fear. The life tha
t has borne me through these years is still in my 
hands and my eyes. Whether I have subdued it, I kn
ow not. But so long as it is there it will seek it
s own way out, heedless of the will that is within
 me. He fell in October 1918, on a day that was so
 quiet and still on the whole front, that the army
 report confined itself to the single sentence: Al
l quiet on the Western Front. He had fallen forwar
d and lay on the earth as though sleeping. Turning
 him over one saw that he could not have suffered 
long; his face had an expression of calm, as thoug
h almost glad the end had come. CHISWICK PRESS: CH
ARLES WHITTINGHAM AND GRIGGS (PRINTERS), LTD. TOOK
S COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON. *** END OF THE PRO
JECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRON
T *** Updated editions will replace the previous o
ne—the old editions will be renamed. Creating the 
works from print editions not protected by U.S. co
pyright law means that no one owns a United States
 copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and 
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United Sta
tes without permission and without paying copyrigh
t royalties. Special rules, set forth in the Gener
al Terms of Use part of this license, apply to cop
ying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electroni
c works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept 
and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered t
rademark, and may not be used if you charge for an
 eBook, except by following the terms of the trade
mark license, including paying royalties for use o
f the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not c
harge anything for copies of this eBook, complying
 with the trademark license is very easy. You may 
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as crea
tion of derivative works, reports, performances an
d research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modifi
ed and printed and given away—you may do practical
ly ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not p
rotected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is 
subject to the trademark license, especially comme
rcial redistribution. START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL
 PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE
 YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Pr
oject Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free dis
tribution of electronic works, by using or distrib
uting this work (or any other work associated in a
ny way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you a
gree to comply with all the terms of the Full Proj
ect Gutenberg™ License available with this file or
 online at www.gutenberg.org/license. Section 1. G
eneral Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gut
enberg™ electronic works 1.A. By reading or using 
any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic wor
k, you indicate that you have read, understand, ag
ree to and accept all the terms of this license an
d intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agre
ement. If you do not agree to abide by all the ter
ms of this agreement, you must cease using and ret
urn or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ el
ectronic works in your possession. If you paid a f
ee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project 
Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to
 be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may 
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom 
you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8. 
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark
. It may only be used on or associated in any way 
with an electronic work by people who agree to be 
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a 
few things that you can do with most Project Guten
berg™ electronic works even without complying with
 the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1
.C below. There are a lot of things you can do wit
h Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follo
w the terms of this agreement and help preserve fr
ee future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic 
works. See paragraph 1.E below. 1.C. The Project G
utenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundat
ion” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in th
e collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
s. Nearly all the individual works in the collecti
on are in the public domain in the United States. 
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright 
law in the United States and you are located in th
e United States, we do not claim a right to preven
t you from copying, distributing, performing, disp
laying or creating derivative works based on the w
ork as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
 are removed. Of course, we hope that you will sup
port the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting f
ree access to electronic works by freely sharing P
roject Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the ter
ms of this agreement for keeping the Project Guten
berg™ name associated with the work. You can easil
y comply with the terms of this agreement by keepi
ng this work in the same format with its attached 
full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it 
without charge with others. 1.D. The copyright law
s of the place where you are located also govern w
hat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in m
ost countries are in a constant state of change. I
f you are outside the United States, check the law
s of your country in addition to the terms of this
 agreement before downloading, copying, displaying
, performing, distributing or creating derivative 
works based on this work or any other Project Gute
nberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representatio
ns concerning the copyright status of any work in 
any country other than the United States. 1.E. Unl
ess you have removed all references to Project Gut
enberg: 1.E.1. The following sentence, with active
 links to, or other immediate access to, the full 
Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently
 whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (a
ny work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” ap
pears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg
” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed
, viewed, copied or distributed: This eBook is for
 the use of anyone anywhere in the United States a
nd most other parts of the world at no cost and wi
th almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy
 it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the Project Gutenberg License included with this e
Book or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are no
t located in the United States, you will have to c
heck the laws of the country where you are located
 before using this eBook. 1.E.2. If an individual 
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from
 texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does n
ot contain a notice indicating that it is posted w
ith permission of the copyright holder), the work 
can be copied and distributed to anyone in the Uni
ted States without paying any fees or charges. If 
you are redistributing or providing access to a wo
rk with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated 
with or appearing on the work, you must comply eit
her with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 thro
ugh 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the 
work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set f
orth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9. 1.E.3. If an in
dividual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is pos
ted with the permission of the copyright holder, y
our use and distribution must comply with both par
agraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional ter
ms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional ter
ms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ Licens
e for all works posted with the permission of the 
copyright holder found at the beginning of this wo
rk. 1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the f
ull Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this wor
k, or any files containing a part of this work or 
any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
 1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute 
or redistribute this electronic work, or any part 
of this electronic work, without prominently displ
aying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 wi
th active links or immediate access to the full te
rms of the Project Gutenberg™ License. 1.E.6. You 
may convert to and distribute this work in any bin
ary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or prop
rietary form, including any word processing or hyp
ertext form. However, if you provide access to or 
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in 
a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
 format used in the official version posted on the
 official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenber
g.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or ex
pense to the user, provide a copy, a means of expo
rting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanill
a ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must 
include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as spe
cified in paragraph 1.E.1. 1.E.7. Do not charge a 
fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing
, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ w
orks unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E
.9. 1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for cop
ies of or providing access to or distributing Proj
ect Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • Y
ou pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits y
ou derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works
 calculated using the method you already use to ca
lculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to 
the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but
 he has agreed to donate royalties under this para
graph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Fo
undation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 
days following each date on which you prepare (or 
are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
 returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marke
d as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Litera
ry Archive Foundation at the address specified in 
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Pro
ject Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You
 provide a full refund of any money paid by a user
 who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within
 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to th
e terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. Yo
u must require such a user to return or destroy al
l copies of the works possessed in a physical medi
um and discontinue all use of and all access to ot
her copies of Project Gutenberg™ works. • You prov
ide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full re
fund of any money paid for a work or a replacement
 copy, if a defect in the electronic work is disco
vered and reported to you within 90 days of receip
t of the work. • You comply with all other terms o
f this agreement for free distribution of Project 
Gutenberg™ works. 1.E.9. If you wish to charge a f
ee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic w
ork or group of works on different terms than are 
set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permi
ssion in writing from the Project Gutenberg Litera
ry Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project 
Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as se
t forth in Section 3 below. 1.F. 1.F.1. Project Gu
tenberg volunteers and employees expend considerab
le effort to identify, do copyright research on, t
ranscribe and proofread works not protected by U.S
. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™
 collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenb
erg™ electronic works, and the medium on which the
y may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, b
ut not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corru
pt data, transcription errors, a copyright or othe
r intellectual property infringement, a defective 
or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus,
 or computer codes that damage or cannot be read b
y your equipment. 1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAI
MER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacem
ent or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the P
roject Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the 
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any
 other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ ele
ctronic work under this agreement, disclaim all li
ability to you for damages, costs and expenses, in
cluding legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REM
EDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF 
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVID
ED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATI
ON, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER
 THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTU
AL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR I
NCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE P
OSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. 1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF
 REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect 
in this electronic work within 90 days of receivin
g it, you can receive a refund of the money (if an
y) you paid for it by sending a written explanatio
n to the person you received the work from. If you
 received the work on a physical medium, you must 
return the medium with your written explanation. T
he person or entity that provided you with the def
ective work may elect to provide a replacement cop
y in lieu of a refund. If you received the work el
ectronically, the person or entity providing it to
 you may choose to give you a second opportunity t
o receive the work electronically in lieu of a ref
und. If the second copy is also defective, you may
 demand a refund in writing without further opport
unities to fix the problem. 1.F.4. Except for the 
limited right of replacement or refund set forth i
n paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘A
S-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRE
SS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRAN
TIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE
. 1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of c
ertain implied warranties or the exclusion or limi
tation of certain types of damages. If any disclai
mer or limitation set forth in this agreement viol
ates the law of the state applicable to this agree
ment, the agreement shall be interpreted to make t
he maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by t
he applicable state law. The invalidity or unenfor
ceability of any provision of this agreement shall
 not void the remaining provisions. 1.F.6. INDEMNI
TY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundatio
n, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of t
he Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project 
Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with thi
s agreement, and any volunteers associated with th
e production, promotion and distribution of Projec
t Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all l
iability, costs and expenses, including legal fees
, that arise directly or indirectly from any of th
e following which you do or cause to occur: (a) di
stribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work,
 (b) alteration, modification, or additions or del
etions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
 Defect you cause. Section 2. Information about th
e Mission of Project Gutenberg™ Project Gutenberg™
 is synonymous with the free distribution of elect
ronic works in formats readable by the widest vari
ety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-a
ged and new computers. It exists because of the ef
forts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
 people in all walks of life. Volunteers and finan
cial support to provide volunteers with the assist
ance they need are critical to reaching Project Gu
tenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gut
enberg™ collection will remain freely available fo
r generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenb
erg Literary Archive Foundation was created to pro
vide a secure and permanent future for Project Gut
enberg™ and future generations. To learn more abou
t the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundatio
n and how your efforts and donations can help, see
 Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information p
age at www.gutenberg.org. Section 3. Information a
bout the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Founda
tion The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Founda
tion is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corpora
tion organized under the laws of the state of Miss
issippi and granted tax exempt status by the Inter
nal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or feder
al tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contri
butions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive 
Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent p
ermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s law
s. The Foundation’s business office is located at 
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (80
1) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date co
ntact information can be found at the Foundation’s
 website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/co
ntact Section 4. Information about Donations to th
e Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Pr
oject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive w
ithout widespread public support and donations to 
carry out its mission of increasing the number of 
public domain and licensed works that can be freel
y distributed in machine-readable form accessible 
by the widest array of equipment including outdate
d equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) a
re particularly important to maintaining tax exemp
t status with the IRS. The Foundation is committed
 to complying with the laws regulating charities a
nd charitable donations in all 50 states of the Un
ited States. Compliance requirements are not unifo
rm and it takes a considerable effort, much paperw
ork and many fees to meet and keep up with these r
equirements. We do not solicit donations in locati
ons where we have not received written confirmatio
n of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine th
e status of compliance for any particular state vi
sit www.gutenberg.org/donate. While we cannot and 
do not solicit contributions from states where we 
have not met the solicitation requirements, we kno
w of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited 
donations from donors in such states who approach 
us with offers to donate. International donations 
are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any st
atements concerning tax treatment of donations rec
eived from outside the United States. U.S. laws al
one swamp our small staff. Please check the Projec
t Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods
 and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number
 of other ways including checks, online payments a
nd credit card donations. To donate, please visit:
 www.gutenberg.org/donate. Section 5. General Info
rmation About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works 
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of th
e Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of elect
ronic works that could be freely shared with anyon
e. For forty years, he produced and distributed Pr
oject Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network 
of volunteer support. Project Gutenberg™ eBooks ar
e often created from several printed editions, all
 of which are confirmed as not protected by copyri
ght in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is inclu
ded. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in co
mpliance with any particular paper edition. Most p
eople start at our website which has the main PG s
earch facility: www.gutenberg.org. This website in
cludes information about Project Gutenberg™, inclu
ding how to make donations to the Project Gutenber
g Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce
 our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
 newsletter to hear about new eBooks.